. the election commission issued a notification calling upon the electorates to elect the members of the legislative assembly in the state of u.p. the date of notification of election was th january and $$$$ for filing nomination papers was rd january. the last date for withdrawal of nomination was th january. the date of poll was st february. in the said election the appellant herein and respondent -no. were the contesting candidates. as a result of counting of votes respondent no. was declared elected as having received the majority of valid votes. the appellant herein filed a petition questioning the election of respondent no. as member of legislative assembly from govardhan s.c.assembly constituency. the election petition purported to be based on the ground that respondent no. is not a member of $$$. after the notices were issued by the high court in the election petition respondent no. filed an application under order rule of the code of civil procedure sic for striking off the grounds i to and paragraphs -of election petition on the ground that those paragraphs did not contain material facts as required under section of the representation of people act for short the act. the high court was of the view that since no fact warranting declaring the election of the respondent herein void had been alleged and the documents referred to therein having not been supplied the same does not satisfy the requirement of section of the act. since the election of respondent no. was not challenged on any other ground the high court dismissed the petition. it is in this way the appellant has preferred this appeal under section of the act challenging the judgment of the high court. we have heard counsel for the parties. the sole question which arises in this case is whether there was a pleading as regards the ground that respondent no. is not a member of the scheduled caste. the relevant paragraphs to this effect runs as under:". that the election of respondent no. shyam is void on the following grounds grounds(i....because the respondent no. with the malafide intention and $$$ sic obtained a caste certificate showing himself a person belonging to scheduled caste and wrongly and fraudulent sic contested the election from the seat which is reserved for scheduled caste where as in fact he does not belong to scheduled caste.iii... that the respondent no. had filed the nomination paper and annexed his casts certificate showing himself to be of scheduled caste. the caste certificate was issued in favour of the respondent no. by tehsildar mathura on.showing in belonging to $$$ caste. that in the respondent no. was issued a caste certificate showing him as of agaria caste. the caste certificate was issued by the tehsildar mathura on.as per the schedule a. that the respondent no. had contested the election of member of $$$ in from ward no. which is a reserved constituency and with his nomination paper he had annexed a caste certificate showing himself belonging to the scheduled caste. that an election petition was filed by laxman singh against the respondent no. challenging his caste as scheduled caste and it was asserted by the petitioner that $$$ belongs to $$$ caste which is a backward caste. that it is pertinent to mention that the brother of $$$ namely $$$ had filed an affidavit in the aforesaid election petition and said that they belong to $$$ caste which is a backward caste and not a scheduled caste. that it is relevant to mention that the $$$ of the respondent $$$ was studying in shree chameli devi khandelwal girls inter college mathura which issued a transfer certificate to the $$$ on..which contents the caste as $$$ which is the caste of the respondent no.. that the facts stated above is conclusive evidence to prove that the respondent no. does not belong to scheduled caste and he is the member of the backward caste as such his nomination paper ought to have been rejected as per the section of the representation of people act. that the petitioner moved an application before the returning officer on.to cancel the nomination of the respondent no. for wrongly showing himself as a member of scheduled caste which he does nor actually belong. a bare perusal of the documents contained in the aforementioned paragraphs would show that the appellant in effect or substance did not raise any material fact that the respondent herein was not a member of the scheduled caste. $$$ counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant however submitted that the averments contained in ground no. ii contains the requisite fact. the said paragraphs contains the grounds for getting aside the improper acceptance of the nomination papers filed by the respondent and can not be treated to be statements containing the requisite material facts which if proved would entitle the appellant in obtaining the reliefs sought for. furthermore the said statements had been verified and purported to be based on the legal advise. it may be true that for improper verification of the material facts pleading in the election petition the same can not be dismissed at the threshold but apart from the fact that the appellant herein did not move any application for revivification of the election petition the averments contained in paragraph does not satisfy the requirement of section of the representation of people act and in that view of the matter the said plea is not available to the appellant. for the aforesaid reason we do not find any merit in the appeal. it is accordingly dismissed. there shall be no order as to costs.