u.c. banerjee j. the validity of the constitution amendment act is the core question in this writ petition and pertains to the issue of reservation. the constitution amendment act introduced a further sub- article of the existing article which the learned advocate appearing in support of the petition has contended runs counter to the constitutional requirement of population based representation for the people and proportional reservation for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the legislative assemblies of the states. it would be convenient however to advert to the relevant extracts of article at this juncture and the same reads as below:. reservation of seats for schedules castes and scheduled tribes in the legislative assemblies of the states.-seats shall be reserved for the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes except the scheduled tribes in the autonomous districts of assam in the legislative assembly of every state...the number of seats reserved for the scheduled castes or the scheduled tribes in the legislative assembly of any state under clause shall bear as nearly as may be the same proportion to the total number of seats in the assembly as the population of the scheduled castes in the state or of the scheduled tribes in the state or part of the state. as the case may be in respect of which seats are so reserved bears to the total population of the state.a...b notwithstanding anything contained in clause until the re -adjustment under article takes effect on the basis of the census after the year of the number of seats in the legislative assembly of the state of $$$ the seats which shall be reserved for the scheduled tribes in the legislative assembly shall be such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats a proportion not less than the number as on the date of coming into force of the constitution amendment act of members belonging to the scheduled tribes in the legislative assembly in existence on the said date bears to the total number of seats in that assembly. as indicated above the $$$ -article b stands incorporated in the constitution by the above noted act of with effect from $$$$. it is the incorporation which stands challenged on the ground that the same negates the proportional reservation on the basis of population based representation embodied in $$$ -article being the key factor of the constitutional scheme of democracy social and political equality together with social and political justice which by themselves from the basic features of the indian constitution. the case issue raised in the matter stands out thus to be the constitutional validity of the effort of the parliament to provide for reservation of seats for scheduled tribes in the $$$ legislative assembly on a basis other than the proportion which the population of the scheduled tribes in the state bears to the total population of the state as would be evident from $$$ -article b herein before noticed. it has further been contended that the newly introduced basis is the basis of the proportion which the number of members belonging to the scheduled tribes in the legislative assembly in existence on the date of commencement of the constitution amendment bears to the total number of seats in that assembly as on that date. the counter affidavit filed by respondent no.union of india however renders a factual support to the submission of the petitirs which inter alia record that out of seats were reserved for scheduled tribes on the basis of their percentage in the population of the state. in addition to the seats reserved for the scheduled tribes open seats were also held by the tribal members and having regard to this position agreement was reached to the demand of reservation of seats held by the scheduled tribes which was however intended to freeze till ad. in the bye -election in june smt. bibhu devi a scheduled tribe member of the legislative assembly holding a general seat in $$$ was selected to $$$ and thus reducing the number of seats held by the tribals to in the assembly. this enhancement thus of seats from to has been the resultant effect for bringing about a satisfactory settlement of the problems of tribals in the state of $$$ and for restoring peace and harmony in the state. it is on record before this court that a memorandum of settlement on $$$ commonly known as tnv accord was signed on 2th august by the representatives of the central government state government of $$$ and $$$ national volunteer for bringing in a satisfactory settlement of the problems of tribals in $$$ and for restoration of peace and amity in the areas where the prevailing condition could not but be ascribed to be a disturbed and the insertion of $$$ -article b in article is in implementation of the memorandum of settlement as noticed above and thus for the benefit of the people of the state without offending as has been contended by mr. additional solicitor general any of the constitutional safeguards far less in breach of the basic features to the indian constitutional scheme. while mr. gupta. learned advocate in support of the petition contended that the rationale behind the reservation of such number of seats for scs and sts can not be doubted in order to enable the latter to have a role to play in the governance of the state but the reservation being influenced by consideration or criteria other than the proportion to the population of scs and sts in the state to be totally deleterious to the basic features of the constitution. for purposes of disposal of the matter it is not necessary to go into the larger question of violation of basic features of the constitution and it would be our primary consideration to see as to whether the view of the transient nature of $$$ -article b of article its constitutional validity can be sustained. the following sub -paragraphs would detail out our views in the matter.$$$ -article b contains a limit which records until the re- adjustment under article takes effect on the basis of the census after the year and the part has its relevance in the number of seats as bears to the total number of seats a proportion not less than the number as on the date of coming into force of the constitution seventy - amendment act and the part of the $$$ -article of members belonging to the scheduled tribes in the legislative assembly in existence on the said date bears to the total number of seats in that assembly. emphasis supplied.sub -article b thus stands out to be in different terms as compared to sub -article since the latter provision sub -article provides for a proportional reservation in keeping with the proportion of their population in the state to the total population of the state. the question thus to be asked is as to whether the provision introduced by the amendment act of sub -article can be treated to be in insertion so as to whittle -down the provisions of sub -article of article. in the view we have expressed it is not necessary for us to deal with the question as to whether proportionality in reservation in keeping with the proportion of the population of the reserved category in the state to the total population of the state is a basic structure of the constitution. incidentally $$$ and have been taken recourse to in support of the contention of the basic structure being violated by reason of the amendment in sub -article 3b of article of the constitution. the leverage given by constitutional mandate by reason of inclusion of the words readjusted by such authority and in such manner as parliament may by law determine emphasis supplied depicts the intent of the parliament as to its true effect. it is an enabling provision for adjustment of seats in accordance with the need of the situation. this authorisation as contained in $$$ and stands out to be an enabling provision for incorporating sub -article 3b under article. be it noted that proportionality though mainly dependent upon the basis of population but it can not always be d with arithmetical precision and mathematical nicety. the provision incorporated as the parliament may by law determine stands out to be an enabling provision to meet the exigencies of constitution. it is in this context the observation of this court in r.c. poudval v. union of india and others manu / sc/022/3manu / sc/022/3 supp scc may be of some relevance and we deem it to be apposite. the constitution bench of this court in paragraph stated:"an examination of the constitutional scheme would indicate that the concept of person vote is in its very nature considerably tolerant of imbalances and departures from a very strict application and enforcement. the provision in the constitution indicating proportionality of representation is necessarily a broad general and logical principle but not intended to be expressed with arithmetical precision. $$$ and are illustrative instances. the principle of mathematical proportionality of representation is not a declared basic requirement in each and every part of the territory of india. accommodations and adjustments having regard to the political maturity awareness and degree of political development in different parts of india might supply the justification for even non -elected assemblies wholly or in part in certain parts of the country. the differing degrees of political development and maturity of various parts of the country may not justify standards based on mathematical accuracy. $$$ a special provision in respect of state of nagaland and illustrate the permissible areas and degrees of departure. the systemic deficiencies in the plenitude of the doctrine of full and effective representation has not been understood in the constitutional philosophy as derogating from the democratic principle. indeed the argument in the case in the perspective is really of violation of the equality principle rather than of the democratic principle. the inequalities in representation in the present case are an inheritance and compulsion from the past. historical considerations have justified a differential treatment. it may be noticed that $$$ national volunteer tnv through their letter dated the may addressed to the governor of $$$ and signed by shri bijoy kumar hrangkhawal stated that keeping in view the solution of problems through negotiations tnv have decided to abjure violence give up secessionist demand and to hold negotiations for a peaceful solution of all the problems of $$$ within the constitution of india. the tnv also furnished its byelaws which conform to the laws in force. on the basis a series of discussions were held with representatives of tnv. as regards reservation of seats in the $$$ legislative assembly for tribals the records depict the following:"with a view to satisfy the aspirations of tribals of $$$ for a greater share in the governance of the state legislative measures will be taken including those for the enactment of the $$$ for the amendment of the constitution. the constitutional amendments shall provide that notwithstanding anything contained in the constitution the number of seats in the legislative assembly of $$$ reserved for scheduled tribes shall be such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats a proportion not less than the number as on the date of coming into force of the constitutional amendment of members belonging to the scheduled tribes in the existing assembly bears to the total number of seats in the existing assembly. the representation of the people act shall also be amended to provide for reservation of seats for the scheduled tribes in the assembly of $$$. however the amendments shall not affect any representation in the existing assembly of $$$ until the dissolution. it is on this factual backdrop the amendment in was introduced does it violate any of the constitutional mandate the answer however in our view can not but be in the negative. ' parliament may by law determine in $$$ and ought to be attributed its proper meaning and upon consideration of the words used and meaning to be attributed thereon we can not plus possibly lend concurrence to the submissions in support of the petition by reason of the transient nature of the incorporation since article specifically refers to until the readjustment on the basis of census after the year. in our view no exception can be taken for incorporation of such a transient provision temporary measures shall have to be taken for social goal and for the benefit of the country as deemed expedient. the parliament is the authority to understand and appreciate the need of the situation and in its wisdom has incorporated the amendment as envisaged in article. thus it can neither be said to be violative of nor be said to be even for infraction of any constitutional mandate. the felt need of the society of a trouble free $$$ stands out to be effected and thus need not detain us any further to come to a conclusion of its constitutional validity. it is to bring forth and continue with the object of the constitution social economic and political justice of the people of india. other contentions need a brief reference as well. the being that to further effectuate the amendment act amendments were also carried out by act no. of in the representation of people act by inserting in section thereof a new sub -section being sub -section wherein as many as seats were reserved for the scheduled tribes in the legislative assembly of $$$. it has been contended that both the constitution amendment act and the amendment in the representation of people act act no. of were passed by $$$ as well as $$$ on $$$$ i. on 3rd $$$$ and the presidential assent was immediately obtained thereon on $$$$ i. $$$$. so as to make the enforcement of both the provisions commencing from december. admittedly there was some hurry but whether that in any way denounce the effort on the part of the parliament to bring about a peaceful solution by implementing the accord -the answer can not also but be in the negative. as noticed above the social goal and social benefit ought to be the criterion for the lawmakers and having due regard to the existing situation and the impending election the parliament has passed a legislation with expedition and obtained presidential assent thereon immediately and as such no motive neither any mala fides can be ascribed. the only other issue raised by way of an alternative submission to the effect that even assuming that the constitution amendment act is valid the provision made by act no.of in sub -section 1c of section of the representation of people act still ultra vires the amended article itself -we are however not inclined to go into this issue since the point has only been raised from the bar without even any mention thereof in the petition itself. on the wake of the aforesaid we do not find any merit in the petition. the same is thus dismissed without any order as to costs.