j.s. khehar j. it is not a matter of dispute that the conditions of service including the manner and method of determining seniority in the cadre of sub -inspectors of police in the state of $$$ are regulated by the $$$ police civil subordinate service rules hereinafter referred to as the service rules notified on.read with the special rules notified on.. $$$ for the rival parties are agreed that the issue of seniority which is the pointed issue of dispute between the rival parties in the present appeals is to be determined under rule of the said rules which is extracted hereunder:. seniority the seniority of a person in the class or category or grade shall unless he has been reduced to lower rank as a punishment be determined by the date of his appointment to such class or category or grade. if any portion of the service of such person does not count towards his probation under the general rules his seniority shall be determined by the date of commencement of his service which counts towards probation provided that in the case of sub -inspectors sub -inspectors of police intelligence and reserve sub -inspectors the seniority inter se shall be fixed on completion of training in the police training college or with the $$$ special police as the case may be instead of at the time of selection in accordance with the list which shall be arranged in order of merit which shall be determined in accordance with the aggregate of marks obtained by each $$$ in respect of his record in the police training college or with the $$$ special police as the case may be $$$ at the final examination.in determining such order of merit no account shall be taken of marks awarded to a probatir in any subject in which he has failed. but such seniority shall be liable to revision by the deputy inspector general of police concerned if he considers it necessary before completion of probation.this sub -rule shall not affect the seniority of any members of the service which may have been fixed expressly or by implication before the th november or any orders as to seniority which may have been passed by competent authority before the th november.provided that in the case of directly recruited sub -inspectors of police intelligence the inter se seniority shall be fixed on completion of training the police training college / $$$ police academy instead of at the time of selection in accordance with the list which shall be arranged in order of merit which shall be determined in accordance with the aggregate of marks obtained by each probatir in the tests and examinations prescribed for them in the training modules conducted at these institutions.the seniority of the sub -inspectors of police intelligence appointed by transfer from among sub -inspectors of police civil or equivalent ranks of this service carrying the same scale of pay shall not be treated as appointment but shall be determined with reference to the date of his seniority in the class or category from which he was transferred.provided also that the inter se seniority of the sub -inspectors selected from among the reserve sub -inspectors of armed reserve and $$$ by transfer shall be fixed in the order of merit for each range z separately based on the aggregate marks obtained by them in the final examination conducted at police training college at the end of months training. in determining such order of merit the marks secured in the failed subjects need not be taken into account.the appointing authority may at the time of passing an order appointing or more persons simultaneously to a class or category fix for any reason the order of preference among them and where such order has been fixed seniority shall be determined in accordance with it.the transfer of a person from class or category of the service to another class or category carrying the same pay or scale of pay shall not be treated as appointment to the latter for purposes of seniority and the seniority of person so transferred shall be determined with reference to the date of his appointment to class or category from which he was transferred. where any difficulty or doubt arises in applying this sub -rule seniority shall be determined by the appointing authority.where a member of the service in any class category or grade is reduced to a lower class category or grade he shall be placed at the top of the ladder unless the authority ordering such reduction directs that he shall take rank in such lower class category or grade next below any special member thereof.the seniority of qualified special policemen appointed by transfer as constables in this service shall be determined by the date of their appointment in this service for purposes of confirmation in vacancies in this service.the seniority of the prohibition staff absorbed in this service shall be determined on the basis of their pay fixed with reference to fundamental rules and in the service provided that the inter -se seniority of these at the same stage of the time scales of pay of the service will be determined by the dates on which they began to draw pay at that stage andprovided further that no member of the excise and prohibition department will on appointment to this service be senior to any member of the service who has put in the same or more period of service than himself.in the case of members of such ranks in the excise and prohibition department the scales of pay of which correspond to the scales of pay of the ranks of this service the date of their appointment in the excise and prohibition department shall determine the seniority.insofar as the above rule is concerned the further admitted position is that the inter se seniority between the rival parties is liable to be determined in terms of the proviso to rule extracted above. before venturing into the determination of the inter se seniority between the rival parties it is necessary in the instance to delineate the factual position. we shall accordingly hereinafter in the instance narrate the factual position as it emerges from the pleadings as also from the different orders appended to the instant batch of civil appeals. the police department of the state of $$$ decided to fill up existing posts of sub -inspector of police by way of direct recruitment. the $$$ state level recruitment board hereinafter referred to as the recruitment board undertook the aforesaid exercise by issuing a notification dated.. as per the said notification posts of sub -inspector in different zs were sought to be filled up. the process of selection from amongst eligible candidates was to be based on a physical test followed by a written test and an interview. having concluded the aforesaid selection process lists of provisionally selected candidates were prepared on the basis of their inter se merit in the selection process for each of the zs. while disposing of the present controversy we have chosen to pass a common order wherein we shall take into consideration the vacancies sought to be filled up for z v warangal range. in this behalf it would be relevant to mention here that the office of the director general & inspector general of police $$$ hyderabad issued a communication dated..indicating the names of provisionally selected candidates for z v warangal range. a list of candidates was attached to the aforesaid communication depicting the provisional list of selected candidates for the above range. this list comprised of names from the open category names from the backward class a ' category names from the backward class b category name from the backward class c ' category names from the backward class d category names from the scheduled castes category names from the scheduled tribes category names from the -servicemen category names from among the police executives name from the ministerial service and name from amongst the sportsmen. on.the afore -stated candidates were directed to report for training. only of the selected candidates however reported for training. the rest of the candidates did not join for a variety of reasons. it is not a matter of dispute that there are police training colleges in the state of $$$ and accordingly the afore -stated selected candidates were deputed for training to the said training colleges. the order dated.vide which the short -listed candidates were deputed for training reveals that the candidates were placed on probation from the date of joining the police training college(s. the training would continue for a period of months followed by practical training for year and months including holding independent charge of a police station for not less than months. the said training was to commence from.. all the selected candidates except $$$ successfully completed their training. insofar as$$$ is concerned he did not participate in the examination at the end of the training due to personal reasons. $$$ was allowed to enroll himself for training along with a batch of candidates who were deputed for training on.. $$$ also completed his training with the said subsequent batch of candidates in. it is relevant to mention that in the statutory provision regulating appointments against the cadre of sub -inspectors of police % of the posts are earmarked to be filled up by way of direct recruitment % of the posts are to be filled up by promotion from head $$$ % from amongst police executives hereinafter referred to as pe out of the $$$ and head $$$ % from police ministerial staff hereinafter referred to as pm % from sportspersons hereinafter referred to as sp not more than % by way of transfer from reserve sub -inspectors from armed reserve / $$$ special police and % by way of appointment under special circumstances on compassionate grounds. original application no. of came to be filed before the $$$ administrative tribunal at hyderabad hereinafter referred to as the administrative tribunal questioning the validity of the determination of the different quotas of recruitment in the aforementid notification dated.. while determining the above controversy the administrative tribunal arrived at the conclusion that except the quota of promotion from head $$$ % by transfer of reserve sub -inspectors of police armed reserve / $$$ special police % and appointments under special circumstances on compassionate grounds % the remaining % quota has to be filled up by direct recruitment. the administrative tribunal thereupon concluded that the direct recruitment quota had been incorrectly determined for all the zs for which the selection had been made in furtherance of the notification dated.. accordingly the administrative tribunal vide its order dated.directed the authorities to recalculate the vacancies under the pe pm and sp quotas for all the ranges and to make appointments in furtherance of the selection process initiated through the notification dated.. in obedience to the aforesaid directions after recalculating the vacancies for pe pm and sp quotas additional names of candidates were sent for training. these candidates commenced their training on.. they completed their training in. it is pertinent to record here that the candidate whose training was deferred namely $$$ and the candidates whose names were short -listed for training in furtherance of the directions issued by the administrative tribunal vide order dated.passed in original application no. of commenced the course of training simultaneously on.. we have recorded hereinabove that out of the names of candidates provisionally selected for z v warangal range only candidates had reported for training. the state government took a conscious decision to depute for purpose of training further candidates equal to the number of candidates who did not join training. as such more candidates who had participated in the process of selection initiated through the notification dated.and were placed immediately below the selected candidates as per the list deputed for training vide letter dated..were sent for training. these candidates were also sent for training to the police training colleges in the state of $$$. these additional candidates also commenced training on.i.in the same batch along with the aforementid $$$ as also the candidates who came to be deputed in furtherance of the order passed by the administrative tribunal in original application no. of. the competent authority namely the deputy inspector general of police warangal vide a memorandum dated.issued a seniority list of sub -inspectors of police z v warangal range. the said seniority list included the names of the original sub -inspectors of police out of the selected for the said z who had completed their training in june. it is also necessary to reflect the negative position namely the abovementid seniority list did not include the name of $$$ who did not complete the training along with the candidates who had joined training in furtherance of their provisional selection vide letter dated... the above seniority list also did not include the names of those selected and appointed in furtherance of the notification dated.consequent upon the determination of the administrative tribunal that the quota of vacancies from pe pm and sp had wrongly been determined. the abovesaid seniority list did not include the names of those candidates who had been selected in furtherance of the notification dated.for the sole reason that some of the candidates who had been selected and appointed had failed to join the police training college(s in furtherance of their provisional selection vide letter dated... it is apparent from the factual position noticed hereinabove that consequent upon the selection process conducted in furtherance of the notification dated.the selected candidates were deputed for training in batches. the training of the batch commenced on.whereas the training of the batch commenced on.. some of those candidates who commenced their training on.approached the administrative tribunal by filing original application no. of assailing the action of the authorities in not including their names in the seniority list dated.wherein only the names of candidates who had joined training on.were reflected. in fact names of n of the candidates who had commenced training on.were reflected in the aforesaid seniority list. the administrative tribunal disposed of original application no. of vide an order dated.. the ultimate directions issued in the aforesaid order are being extracted hereunder in view of the matter the applicants are directed to make a detailed representation to the director general and inspector general of police putting forth their complete case and the director general and inspector general of police is directed to dispose of the representation of the applicants preferably before making promotions to the posts of inspector of police in z -iv.in obedience to the directions issued by the administrative tribunal on.those candidates who had been selected consequent upon the issuance of the notification dated.but had commenced their training at the police training college(s on.submitted a detailed representation wherein they asserted that their names ought to have been interspersed with the candidates who had commenced their training with effect from.. the above claim was premised on rule extracted at the beginning of the instant judgment. the director general & inspector general of police on receipt of the representation sought the following clarification from the principal secretary to the government of $$$ vide letter dated.the seniority of sis civil though selected on the notification for batch but appointed and underwent basic training during can be fixed alongwith batch of sis civil as they were selected as per the notification issued in the year.a perusal of the clarification sought reveals that the real intent behind seeking the aforesaid clarification was whether the candidates selected in furtherance of the notification dated.were to be treated as candidates belonging to a single batch or whether they were to be treated as batches on the basis of the different dates of commencing training the batch on.and the batch on.. simply stated the question posed was whether the selected candidates in furtherance of the notification dated.were to be treated as a single batch for the year. or alternatively they were to be treated as batches of the year i.in respect of candidates deputed for training on.and the of the year i.in respect of candidates deputed for training on.. the government of $$$ issued a memorandum dated.in compliance of the order dated.passed by the administrative tribunal while disposing of original application no. of and in reply to the letter dated.issued by the director general & inspector general of police $$$ seeking clarification with reference to the inter se seniority of the parties in dispute. vide its memorandum dated.the state government accepted delay at its hands in not deputing the selected candidates from the pe pm and sp quotas for training due to a wrong calculation of the vacancies. having accepted delay at its own hands the state government was of the view that the candidates sent for training belatedly who had commenced their training at the concerned police training college with effect from.were entitled to seniority along with those deputed for training on.. this according to the state government would have to be achieved by interspersing the candidates deputed for the training courses on.and.by taking into consideration the aggregate marks obtained by them at the end of their training at the police training college(s. it is therefore apparent that the state government accepted the contention of the candidates deputed for training on.namely the applicants who had approached the administrative tribunal by filing original application no. of. this position was adopted by the state government on account of the fact that the candidates were selected through a common process initiated by the recruitment board vide notification dated.. the claim of the candidates whose names were included in the list of provisionally selected candidates issued on..was that they were higher in the merit list vis -à -vis candidates who were deputed for training on.and as such those deputed for training vide letter dated..should be treated as a batch separate and distinct from the batch of candidates who were deputed for training on.. the candidates whose names were included in the letter dated..and who were exclusively placed in the seniority list dated.filed detailed objections to the determination rendered by the state government vide its order / memorandum dated.. the state government vide its order dated.rejected the objections filed by the candidates deputed for training on.. in sum and substance the claim of the candidates who were deputed for training on.that they should be placed en -masse above the candidates deputed for training on.in the seniority list came to be rejected. accordingly vide order dated.the state government issued a memorandum concluding that the candidates deputed for training on.were entitled to be interspersed in the seniority list along with the candidates who were deputed for training on.. in sum and substance the state government concluded that those selected in continuation of the notification dated.by the recruitment board were entitled to be depicted in a combined / common seniority list prepared in consonance with rule reproduced above. the different orders passed by the state government referred to in the foregoing paragraphs whereby it had concluded that the candidates deputed for training on.were liable to be infused for purposes of seniority with candidates deputed for training on.were assailed by the former through a bunch of original applications filed before the administrative tribunal. the afore -stated batch of original applications came to be dismissed by the administrative tribunal vide order dated.. the applicants before the administrative tribunal therefore approached the high court of judicature $$$ at hyderabad hereinafter referred to as the high court by filing a series of writ petitions. the writ petitions came to be dismissed by the high court by a common order dated.. the determination by the high court in upholding the orders passed by the state government as also the orders passed by the administrative tribunal are subject matter of challenge in the instant batch of appeals. since the issue which is subject matter of challenge is common we propose to dispose of the same by a common order in the same fashion as the controversy was determined originally by the administrative tribunal and subsequently by the high court. the solitary issue that arises for consideration at our hands is whether the candidates selected in furtherance of the notification dated.issued by the recruitment board constitute batch. or whether they constitute batches of candidates based on the separate dates when they were deputed for training. the contention advanced at the hands of the learned counsel for the appellants before this court was that the selected candidates are liable to be treated as batches of candidates. the batch according to the appellants was the batch of candidates deputed for training on.. and the batch according to the appellants would comprise of candidates who were deputed for training on.. as against the challenge raised at the hands of the appellants through their learned counsel it was the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents that only selection process was conducted in furtherance of the notification dated.by the recruitment board. out of the same selection list candidates were deputed for training ly on.and thereafter on.. it was the submission of the learned counsel representing the private respondents and supported by the learned counsel representing the state of $$$ that bifurcation of candidates into different trainee groups would not result in their being described as batches of candidates. the submission was that all these candidates having been selected for appointment in furtherance of a common selection process conducted by the recruitment board they were liable to be treated as a single batch of candidates. we will venture to determine the controversy in hand by adopting a -step consideration process. we shall thereupon record our conclusion.consideration we shall in the instance examine the seniority position only with respect to $$$. the name of $$$ was included in the list of selected candidates issued by the director general & inspector general of police $$$ hyderabad vide letter dated... it is not a matter of dispute that the aforesaid $$$ was originally deputed for training at the police training college on.. $$$ however could not complete his training on account of the fact that he did not participate in the examination conducted at the end of the training due to personal reasons. the aforesaid $$$ was allowed to complete his training along with the batch of candidates deputed for training in the succeeding batch on.. the above factual position which was duly taken into consideration by the administrative tribunal and by the high court was not disputed during the course of hearing before us. the question which arises for our consideration is whether $$$ would be entitled to be included in the seniority list along with the batch of candidates with whom he was originally deputed for training on.or with the batch of candidates who were deputed for training thereafter on.. having given our thoughtful consideration and keeping in mind the basic principle underlying the relevant proviso to rule extracted at the beginning of this judgment we are of the considered view that the mandate for the determination of seniority under the aforesaid proviso is to the following effect.  inter se seniority of sub -inspectors of police is not to be determined in accordance with the merit list drawn up at the time of their selection. and inter se seniority of sub -inspectors of police has to be determined on the basis of the aggregate of marks obtained by each probatir at the final examination on the conclusion of their training at the police training college(s. insofar as the aforesaid $$$ is concerned it is not open to the candidates deputed for training in the instance to contend that though $$$ 's name was included in the list of provisionally selected candidates issued on..his seniority ought to be determined along with the candidates deputed for training later. it is apparent that insofar as the $$$ is concerned since his name was included amongst the names of candidates provisionally selected as sub -inspectors of police vide letter dated..those deputed for training vide the same letter dated..can not be permitted to contend that his seniority can not be determined alongwith them. the above mentid course suggested by the learned counsel for the appellants is not open because the same would give primacy to something beyond the purview of the proviso to the rule in question. we have no doubt in our mind that $$$ must figure in the seniority list along with those deputed for training on.for the simple reason that his name existed in the list of names including the appellants deputed for training vide letter dated... there can therefore be no doubt whatsoever that insofar as $$$ is concerned even though he completed his training in the course which commenced from.his position in the inter se seniority list was bound to be reflected alongwith those with whom he was deputed for training according to the aggregate of marks obtained by him on the completion of his training at the police training college in terms of rule.consideration insofar as this step is concerned we shall exclusively take into consideration the manner of determination of seniority of candidates appointed as sub -inspectors of police against the vacancies belonging to the pe pm and sp quotas consequent upon the directions issued by the administrative tribunal dated.while disposing of original application no. of. in this behalf it is relevant to mention that the vacancies falling to each of the aforesaid quotas was found to have been incorrectly determined by the state government while making appointments in furtherance of the notification dated.. the administrative tribunal accordingly directed the state government to re -calculate the strength of the said quotas and to make appointments. it is not a matter of dispute that consequent upon the determination of the administrative tribunal the quotas with reference to the aforesaid cadres which had wrongly been determined for each of the zs were re -calculated. the state government on re -calculation of the vacancy position with reference to the pe pm and sp quotas appointed candidates from the aforesaid quotas out of the selection process conducted by the recruitment board in furtherance of the notification dated.. thereupon they were deputed for training on.. it is therefore apparent that had the quotas been correctly determined by the state government these candidates would have been originally appointed along with others when the letter dated..was issued by the director general & inspector general of police $$$ hyderabad. in the above eventuality they would have been deputed for training in the very instance on.. for no fault of theirs despite their selection in the same recruitment process which was conducted in furtherance of the notification dated.they were deputed for training on.. the delay in deputing the candidates belonging to pe pm and sp quotas squarely falls on the appointing authority and not on the candidates who were subsequently deputed for training from the pe pm and sp quotas. for exactly the same reason as had been depicted under consideration one above we are of the view that those deputed for training against the pe pm and sp quotas on.being not in any manner responsible for their not having been deputed along with the originally selected candidates on.are liable to a fixation in the seniority list in exactly the same manner as $$$. this is liable to be d in terms of the mandate of the relevant proviso to rule aforementid by interspersing them along with those included in the original seniority list by determining their position on the basis of the aggregate marks obtained by them in the final examination at the conclusion of their training at the police training college(s.consideration in consideration and consideration above we have concluded that even though the appointees in question were deputed for training on.their seniority had to be determined alongwith the candidates who had been deputed for training on.. we shall now endeavour to consider the manner of fixing inter se seniority of the candidates who were selected in the process of selection conducted in furtherance of the notification dated.by the recruitment board but had not been appointed on account of the fact that they did not fall within the number of vacancies advertised. it is however relevant to notice that after the issuance of the letter dated..whereby provisionally selected candidates were deputed for training to fill up the advertised vacancies for the posts of sub -inspector of police in all the zs it came to be realized that all the provisionally selected candidates did not join the police training college(s for the said training. so far as z v warangal range is concerned only candidates joined training. at that very moment it was open to the appointing authority to depute further candidates for training out of those whose names fell immediately below the names of candidates deputed for training vide letter dated..against the balance vacancies. the competent authority however delayed in deputing the names of these candidates. it eventually deputed these candidates for training on.. from the factual position depicted hereinabove it is not possible for us to accept that the candidates who were deputed for training on.and those deputed for training on.to fulfill the deficiency can be described as different batches. the selection process having been joint and in furtherance of the same notification dated.issued by the recruitment board it is inevitable for us to conclude that the candidates deputed to the different courses of training on.and.were essentially candidates belonging to a singular batch who were selected through a common process of selection. in fact the instant inference insofar as the issue of inter se seniority is concerned is inevitable as the dates on which the candidates were deputed for training are inconsequential so far as rule is concerned. rule leaves no room for any doubt that even the merit position in the selection process is not to be taken into consideration while determining the inter se seniority of candidates selected from a common process of selection. if we were to accept the contention advanced on behalf of the appellants that those deputed in the batch should be placed above all those deputed in the batch we would necessarily be placing the selected candidates in groups based on their merit position in the selection process. those deputed for training in the batches of.and.came to be so deputed only because of their respective merit position in the selection process. this determination would be in clear breach of the proviso to rule which postulates that inter se seniority of sub -inspectors of police is not to be determined in accordance with the merit list drawn up at the time of their selection. the seniority of candidates who are selected from a common process of selection is to be determined on the basis of the final aggregate marks obtained by them during the course of their training at the police training college(s in the state of andhra pradesh. that being the mandate of the rule we are of the considered view that for candidates who had participated in a common process of selection irrespective of the dates on which they were deputed for training their inter se seniority is liable to be determined on the basis of the aggregate of marks obtained by them at the final examination at the concerned police training college. this interpretation placed by us on rule of the service rules satisfies the underlying principle given effect to in the rule namely that the candidates appointed against the posts of sub -inspector of police were to be arranged in the seniority list not on the basis of the marks obtained in the process of selection but according to the aggregate marks obtained by them at the culmination of the training processes. additionally the instant interpretation would result in a uniform determination of the separate considerations dealt with by us. it would be absurd to apply principle to $$$ another principle to those selected and appointed in furtherance of the directions issued by the administrative tribunal on.in original application no. of and a separate principle for determining seniority of candidates who were deputed for training later because some of the selected and appointed candidates did not join training. this process of deputing candidates for training could have been adopted within $$$$ of the candidates not assuming training at the police training college(s despite being required to do so. the concerned authorities delayed the matter for $$$$. neither is it possible for us to find fault with the concerned individuals deputed for training belatedly nor is it possible for us to interpret a simple and straightforward rule of seniority differently just because candidates were deputed to the training course belatedly. the view expressed by us upholds the order passed by the state government and also affirms the legal position expressed by the administrative tribunal in its common order dated.as well as in the impugned order dated.passed by the high court. insofar as the conclusions in the consideration recorded hereinabove are concerned it would be relevant to mention here that the learned counsel for the appellants namely the candidates who were deputed for training on.had also vehemently contended that the proviso to rule would not be applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case because the proviso contemplates a joint training process where those selected and appointed as sub -inspector of police are graded on the basis of their performance during a joint / common training process at the police training college. it was submitted that it would be unfair and unreasonable to determine inter se seniority of candidates on the basis of different training processes the which had commenced on.and the which had commenced on.. the submission noticed in the foregoing paragraph seems to be attractive on blush. $$$ for the respondent -state however pointed out that those selected provisionally vide letter dated..and who were deputed for training on.had been sent to undergo training to different police training colleges in the state of andhra pradesh. if the submission advanced at the hands of the learned counsel for the appellants was to be accepted according to learned counsel for the state government even the seniority position of the candidates who had joined training on.having been selected in zone -v warangal range could not be validly determined for the simple reason that they had undertaken training at different police training colleges. according to learned state counsel candidates who were deputed for training subsequently on.were also deputed to the same police training colleges in the state of andhra pradesh the curricula for the police training colleges and the standard prescribed being the same just as the manner in which the candidates deputed for training to the different police training colleges could be compared with another on the basis of the aggregate marks obtained by them for fixing their position in the seniority list so also those deputed for training on different dates on.and.could likewise be compared with another on the basis of the aggregate marks obtained by them in the final examination of their police training. we find merit in the submissions advanced by the learned counsel representing the state of andhra pradesh. for the above reason it is not possible for us to accept the above noticed contention advanced at the hands of the learned counsel for the appellants. during the course of hearing some judgments were cited at the bar to support the cause of the appellants and that of the private respondents. the judgments cited pertain to the particular rule of seniority which was subject matter of consideration. none of the seniority rules which were taken into consideration is akin to rule which is to be applied for determining the inter se seniority of sub -inspectors of police in the present case. since the validity of rule aforementioned is not a subject matter of challenge we have ventured to interpret the same in consonance with the mandate and intent thereof. we would not like to burden this judgment with the judgments cited at the bar by the rival parties. for the reasons recorded hereinabove we find no merit in the instant civil appeals. the same are accordingly dismissed. hon'ble mr. justice $$$ pronounced the judgment of the bench comprising his lordship and hon'ble mr. justice s.a. bobde. for the reasons recorded in the reportable judgment which is placed on the file the appeals are dismissed.