r.k. agrawal j.civil appeal nos. -. these appeals are directed against the common final judgment and order dated.passed by the division bench of the high court of kerala at ernakulam in $$$. and of whereby the high court dismissed the appeals filed by the appellants herein against the judgment and order dated.passed by learned single judge of the high court in $$$ c nos. and of. $$$ the state of kerala by notification dated.issued in exercise of the power conferred by section of the lotteries regulation act in short the act prohibited the sale of all computerized and online lottery tickets marketed and operated through vending machines terminals electronic machines and tickets sold through internet in the state with immediate effect and declared that kerala shall be a free z from online and internet lotteries.by a subsequent notification dated.the state of kerala decided to prohibit the sale of all lotteries organized conducted or promoted by the state as well as by every other state government in the state of kerala with immediate effect and declared that the state shall hereafter be a lottery free z.the state of kerala in partial modification of the notification dated.issued a subsequent notification dated.permitting the sale of paper lotteries organized conducted or promoted by every state government including the state of kerala and the prohibition imposed on the sale of computerized and on -line lottery tickets organized conducted or promoted by every state government continued to remain in force declaring the territory of the state of kerala to be online internet and computerized lotteries free z.being aggrieved by the notification dated.discriminating between the paper lotteries and online lotteries the all kerala online lottery dealers association state $$$ and sreekala and others filed $$$ c nos. and of respectively before the high court.a learned single judge of the high court by judgment and order dated.dismissed the writ petitions.being aggrieved by the decision of the learned single judge the $$$s therein preferred $$$. and of before the division bench of the high court.the division bench by a common judgment and order dated.dismissed the appeals.against the said order the appellants have preferred these appeals by way of special leave before this court.$$$ c nos. of and of bibhash karmakar -the $$$ herein has filed the above petitions in public interest alleging that the states of $$$ nagaland and $$$ are running lottery business contrary to the provisions of the act which is detrimental to the society as a whole.this court by order dated.in $$$ c no. of directed the state to explain as to whether the state of $$$ is running lottery business contrary to the provisions of section of the act. in response to the above the state government filed an affidavit dated.before this court denying all the irregularities as claimed by the $$$ herein and cited various provisions of the act as well as the $$$ online nerk lottery rules to show that the lottery business in the state is in consonance with the pre -existing rules and regulations.this court by order dated.tagged writ petition c no. of with writ petition c no. of. heard the arguments advanced by learned senior counsel for the parties and perused the records. since a common question of law and facts arise in these appeals and petitions they are being disposed of by this common judgment.points for consideration:. the sole question for consideration before this court is whether the state government can discriminate between the paper lottery and online lottery in pursuance of the provision of section of the act.rival submissions:. learned senior counsel for the appellants contended before this court that online lottery is also a lottery as defined under section of the act. so if the state government intends to prohibit the same it has to prohibit all the lotteries whether paper or online. the selective prohibition of the sale of online lottery tickets is impermissible in the light of section of the act as interpreted by this court in b.r. enterprises v. state of u.p. and ors. $$$ / sc/00/$$$$$$$ / sc/00/$$$$ scc. the distinction drawn by the state government between paper lottery and online lottery is discriminatory and violative of $$$ of the constitution of india. learned senior counsel further contended that the impugned notification is vitiated by mala fides. it was further alleged that the state government is being controlled by the paper lottery mafia and under its influence the sale of online lottery tickets has been prohibited. the state government does not have the competence to issue the impugned notification. though the state government is competent to legislate on lotteries by virtue of item of list ii concerning betting and gambling the power to legislate on lotteries organized by the government of india or the government of a state is the exclusive preserve of the parliament by virtue of entry of list i of the schedule. so the state government which is incompetent to legislate on lotteries run by other states has no power to issue the impugned notification. the state government without legislative competence has ventured to prohibit online lottery which is totally fraudulent and colourable exercise of the power. learned senior counsel for the appellants further pointed out that the contention that online lottery was not in the contemplation of the parliament or the court can not be accepted. the act has to be interpreted to adapt it to the changing times. according to learned senior counsel the parliament was well aware about the growing advancement of science and technology and the use of electronic media in $$$$ to come and therefore when it defined lottery under section of the act it included also the online lottery or internet lottery which may come into existence in future. it was further submitted that the provision contained in section of the act would empower the state government to prohibit the sale of tickets of all the lotteries and it can not be restricted only to online or internet lotteries. he further submitted that if it is to be taken that the online lottery is a class of lotteries for which the state government is empowered to prohibit then it is only the parliament which can classify the same and the state of kerala has no power to do so. according to him the central government framed the lotteries regulation rules in short the rules under sub -section of section of the act and defined online lotteries under rule of the rules that too for the time in the year therefore the state government had no right or jurisdiction to prohibit the online lottery in the year. the principles laid down in b.r. enterprises supra will apply to all types of lotteries and a judgment of this court can not be ignored merely by saying that it failed to consider some point or other. learned senior counsel further contended that this court in b.r. enterprises supra has read down section of the act to save it from the vice of unconstitutionality emanating from conferring unbridled power on the state which may be termed as abdication of the essential legislative function by failing to provide guidelines for the exercise of that power. in the said decision in paragraphs and it was held as follows:. in section lotteries are defined to be a scheme for distribution of prizes by a lot or chance. this definition itself recognizes that even in state lotteries the prizes are to be collected by chance without any skill hence gambling in nature. section prohibits that no state lotteries can be organized without the condition stipulated under $$$ a to k of section. section provides the conditions to be complied with by the state lotteries. to initiate any state lottery it is left to the policy of each state for this act is silent. the only control is in case it decides then it must follow the conditions as laid down under section. next comes section which is subject matter of challenge the delegation of power to the state to prohibit the sale of lottery tickets organized by every other state. if a state desires not to subject its people to the lottery gambling it has no power to restrict lotteries organized by other states. it is to remove this mischief that power is conferred through delegation to the states to do it in terms of their own policy. by virtue of this now the state government can prohibit sale of lottery tickets of every other state within its territory. next section seeks strict compliance with section. under this the central government may prohibit any state lottery which is being conducted in contravention of the conditions as laid down under section or section. section shows the rigour of this act by making it a penal offence as against all who violate the provisions of this act be it is head of the department of the government or the agent promoter or trader to be punishable with years rigorous imprisonment. section makes such an offence cognizable and non -bailable. similarly section deals with offences committed by the companies. section entrusts the central government power to give directions to the state government for carrying into execution the provisions of this act rule or order. sections and are the rule -making power entrusted to the central and the state governments respectively. section repeals the $$$. thus the whole act makes clear that the subject it is dealing with is gambling in nature. the object of the act is not to control the policy decision of each state to start or to close its lotteries but to regulate it in case a state decides to run its own lottery through modalities and conditions laid down therein. emphasis of the whole act is to abide by the conditions strictly if you want to run a lottery. thus regulation is through conditions to eliminate even the remotest possibility of malpractices by providing stringent measures for its compliance. perusal of the act reveals the scheme of the act is limited in its application and it admits the subject it is dealing is gambling in nature. as we have said the decision to collect or not to collect revenue through state lotteries is exclusively within the policy decision of the state and for this neither the union nor parliament interferes nor is there any indication under the act. thus the question which remains is if any state decides that it does not want any lotteries but if it feels helpless as having no jurisdiction over the lotteries organized by other states what is the way out this can only be d by parliament or by entrusting this power on such state desiring so which has been d through section. in this background for this helplessness of a state as recorded in $$$ case -i $$$ / sc/0/$$$$$$$ / sc/0/$$$$ scc the remedy is provided by entrusting this power on the state under the impugned provision. this helps such state to achieve its objective of lottery gambling free z within its territory. a well -concerned remedy. next question is what could have been the guideline if state lotteries are gambling and it can not be terms as trade and commerce at common parlance for any free right under the constitution. such right though recognized under $$$ so other states may continue to enjoy till prohibited by valid law and if any state wants within its state lottery -free z and for which the power is entrusted to such state it can not be said in this setting and background and the nature of the subject that such a delegation is of its essential legislative power. the only guideline necessary in such delegation is to see that the state does not pick and choose state from the other which guideline is already provided in this section. it provides that such a ban could only be if it is applied to every other state. the only residual field of attack so far as this delegation could be which has been attacked in this case that the state could on hand ban lotteries of every other state but run its own lotteries. it is argued that while a state bans lotteries of other states not to permit any gambling activity in the public interest as a policy but this very public interest is flouted by having lotteries of its own. it is true that unless this provision is read down to mean a state can only ban lotteries of other states when it bans as a policy its own lotteries it is bound to be subjected to the vagaries as pointed out and on deeper scrutiny it may not successfully stand. but by reading down the provision which has to be read that it is only that state which decides lottery -free z within its state can prohibit lotteries of other states clearly provides the guidance for the exercise of such a power. it is inbuilt and inherent in the provision itself in view of the scheme of the act and nature of subject in issue. if interpretation as given on behalf of the state of tamil nadu is accepted that delegation of power is absolute then the submission that such delegation is unbridled without any guideline carries great weight. submission for the state of tamil nadu is that the lotteries may be prohibited in phases viz. while running its own lotteries yet prohibiting other lotteries may be as a public policy for law and order for political reasons morality etc. for surviving such an interpretation given by mr. ganguli parliament should have provided some guidelines. such an interpretation falls into the trap of the submission that this delegation is unbridled. so if there are interpretations the interpretation which upholds the validity should be accepted. so the interpretation as given by mr. ganguli can not be accepted. we find on plain reading of section it empowers the state government within its state to prohibit the sale of tickets of the lotteries organized by every other state. there is also nothing in the language reading by itself so as to say whether such power can be exercised by the state while running its own lottery or can be exercised only where such state does not run its own lottery. this leads to possible interpretations as referred to above. in view of settled principle of interpretations the interpretation given by the union to read down the provision has substance. this would mean that the state could only exercise such discretion if it decides not to have any lottery within its territory including its own lottery. in this situation the delegate is tied down by this limitation which itself is a clear guide to a state hence can not be said to be unbridled delegation. so even to the part it can not be said to be arbitrary or unbridled. so we have no hesitation to approve the interpretation given by the union to uphold the validity of section.relying on the above quoted paragraphs learned senior counsel for the appellants vehemently contended that the state shall either prohibit the sale of all lotteries or allow the sale of all lotteries in the state. selective prohibition of a particular type of lottery is impermissible in the light of the above binding judgment. in support of this submission learned senior counsel apart from the decision in b.r. enterprises supra relied on the following decisions viz.the senior electric inspector and ors. v. laxmi narayan chopra and ors. $$$ / sc/0/$$$ / sc/0/ scr state through cbi / new delhi v. s.j. choudhary manu / sc//$$$$manu / sc//$$$$ scc and sil import usa v. exim aides silk exporters bangalore manu / sc/0/$$$$manu / sc/0/$$$$ scc. the learned senior counsel for the state of kerala -the respondent herein supported the impugned notification by contending that the state government is competent to prohibit a particular type of lottery. there is no fetter on the power of the government under section. learned senior counsel further submitted that when the parliament enacted the act in the year there was nothing before it to presume that in times to come online lotteries will also come into existence apart from the paper lotteries and therefore the provision of section which empowers the state government to prohibit the sale of tickets of a lottery organized conducted or promoted by every other state necessarily relate to paper lottery. even otherwise online lottery is different from paper lottery and can be treated as a class in itself. the state government is therefore empowered under section of the act to prohibit the sale of online lotteries or internet lotteries in its state. he further submitted that the central government itself treated online lotteries as a different class in itself and therefore framed the rules providing the rules and regulations for organizing paper lottery or online lottery or both subject to certain terms and conditions. thus the intention of the parliament was to treat paper lotteries and online lotteries a different class. the decision in b.r. enterprises supra would therefore necessarily be understood to relate to paper lotteries only. the said decision can not be construed as a precedent. so the declaration of law made therein is not applicable to online lotteries. it is also submitted that prohibition of sale of online lotteries has been made bona fide and the classification is reasonable and not arbitrary. learned senior counsel further submitted that the scheme of section would show that the act was framed with a view to deal with paper lotteries which were in vogue at that point of time whereas the distributors of online lotteries do much more than selling the tickets. they decide and implement the lottery schemes provide infra -structure and technology print lotteries and participate in the conduct of draws. section of the act prohibits holding of draws more than once in $$$$. this restriction has been made taking into account the conduct of paper lotteries. but in online lotteries to draws are made every day in $$$$. on the above grounds the respondents prayed for dismissal of the appeals.discussion:0. before going into the validity of the impugned notification it is fruitful to refer to certain provisions of the act. the relevant portion of the statement of $$$s and $$$ for framing this legislation is as under the conduct of certain types of lottery trade in the country the malpractices thereof and their impact on the poorer sections of the society has been under scrutiny of the government for quite some time. the continued prevalence of the popularly known single digit and instant lotteries and the temptation offered by them proved to be the undoing of many families especially poor $$$$ wagers and low income groups.in spite of the guidelines issued by the central government over a period of time as also the guidelines issued in the recent past by the honourable supreme court. in the matter the evil has not been totally eliminated and it is felt that a central legislation to regulate the conduct of lotteries is necessary to protect the interest of the gullible poor.section defines ' lottery which reads as follows:(b ' lottery means a scheme in whatever form and by whatever name called for distribution of prizes by lot or chance to those persons participating in the chances of a prize by purchasing tickets. prohibition of lotteries.as otherwise provided in section no state government shall organize conduct or promote any lottery.section enumerates the conditions subject to which a state government may organize conduct or promote a lottery which reads as follows:. conditions subject to which lotteries may be organized etc.a state government may organize conduct or promote a lottery subject to the following conditions namely:(a prizes shall not be offered on any pre -announced number or on the basis of a single digit;(b the state government shall print the lottery tickets bearing the imprint and logo of the state in such manner that the authenticity of the lottery ticket is ensured;(c the state government shall sell the tickets either itself or through distributors or selling agents;(d the proceeds of the sale of lottery tickets shall be credited into the public account of the state;(e the state government itself shall conduct the draws of all the lotteries;(f the prize my unclaimed within such time as may be prescribed by the state government or not otherwise distributed shall become the property of that government;(g the place of draw shall be located within the state concerned;(h no lottery shall have more than draw in $$$$;(i the draws of all kinds of lotteries shall be conducted $$$$ as may be prescribed by the state government;(j the number of bumper draws of a lottery shall not be more than in a calendar year;(k such other conditions as may be prescribed by the central government. prohibition of sale of ticket in a state.state government may within the state prohibit the sale of tickets of a lottery organized conducted or promoted by every other state. prohibition of organization etc.of lottery.central government may by order published in the official gazette prohibit a lottery organized conducted or promoted in contravention of the provisions of section or where tickets of such lottery are sold in contravention of the provisions of section. penalty.where a lottery is organized conducted or promoted after the date on which this act receives the assent of the president in contravention of the provisions of this act by any department of the state government the head of the department shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to years or with fine or with both provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such head of the department liable to any punishment if he proves that the contravention was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such contravention.notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section where a contravention under this act has been committed by a department of government and it is proved that the contravention has been committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any officer other than the head of the department such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.if any person acts as an agent or promoter or trader in any lottery organized conducted or promoted in contravention of the provisions of this act or sells distributes or purchases the ticket of such lottery he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to years or with fine or with both. offences to be cognizable and non -bailable.offence under this act shall be cognizable and non -bailable. from the above provisions it can be seen that the tickets of a state -run lottery shall be printed by the state itself. sale of tickets al is permitted through the agents or through distributors. the entire sale proceeds have to be credited in the public account of the state. draws of all the lotteries have to be conducted by the state government. no lottery can have more than draw in $$$$. bumper draws shall not be more than in a calendar year. the cumulative effect of sub -sections h and j appears to be that a state can run only ordinary lotteries and bumper lotteries in $$$$. section empowers the state government to prohibit the sale of tickets of lotteries organized conducted or promoted by every other state government. section empowers the central government to prohibit the conduct of lotteries which are in violation of the provisions of section or which are sold in contravention of the prohibition imposed by the state government under section. section provides the penalty for running a lottery in violation of the provisions of the act. the head of the department and other officers responsible for the conduct of the lottery shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to years or with fine or with both. similar punishment can be imposed on those who sell or purchase the tickets of such a lottery. section makes the offences under the act cognizable and non -bailable. cognizable offence means an offence for which a police officer may arrest the accused without warrant section of the $$$ of criminal procedure in short the $$$. in this background it is also relevant to quote section of the $$$ which reads as follows:. trial of offences under the indian penal $$$ and other laws all offences under the indian penal $$$ of shall be investigated inquired into tried and otherwise dealt with according to the provisions hereinafter contained.all offences under any other law shall be investigated inquired into tried and otherwise dealt with according to the same provisions but subject to any enactment for the time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating inquiring into trying or otherwise dealing with such offences.since no provision is made for investigating the offences under the act the provisions under the $$$ will apply to its investigation by virtue of section of the $$$ quoted above. it is also relevant to mention the $$$ issued by the state government from time to time.government of $$$. no. kl / tv(n)//00 -gazetteextraordinarypublished by authorityvol. lvolume $$$$ thursdayno. nd pousha of $$$ h departmentnotificationg.o. p no. dated thiruvanathapuram th $$$$.s.r.o. no.  exercise of the powers conferred by section of the lotteries regulation act central act of the government of kerala hereby prohibit the sale of all computerised and online lottery tickets marketed and operated through vending machines terminals electronic machines and tickets sold through internet in kerala with immediate effect and declare that kerala shall be the free z from online and $$$ order of the governor.p. mara pandyan secretary to governmentexplanatory note(this does not form part of the notification but is intended to indicate its general purport.government have decided to prohibit the sale of computerized and online lottery tickets in the state of kerala with immediate effectthis notification is intended to achieve the above object.government of $$$. no. kl / tv(n)//00 -gazetteextraordinarypublished by authorityvol. lvolume $$$$ thursdayno. magga of $$$ h departmentnotificationg.o. p no. /$$$$/td dated thiruvanathapuram 7th $$$$.s.r.o. no. notification ii g.o. p no. dated th $$$$ published as s.r.o. no. in kerala gazette extraordinary no. dated $$$$ $$$$ prohibiting the sale of computerized and online lottery tickets in the state of kerala has been issued under section of the lotteries regulation act central act of.and whereas the government of kerala have decided to prohibit the sale of all lotteries organized conducted or promoted by the state of kerala with immediate effect.and whereas the government of kerala have decided to prohibit the sale of tickets of all lotteries organized conducted or promoted by every other state government also;now therefore in exercise of the powers conferred by section of the lotteries regulation act central act of and all other powers enabling for it the government of kerala hereby prohibit the sale of tickets of all lotteries organized conducted or promoted by every other state government including lotteries organized conducted or promoted by the government of kerala in the state of kerala with immediate effect and declare that the state of kerala shall hereafter be a lottery free z.by order of the governor.p. mara pandyan secretary to governmentexplanatory note(this does not form part of the notification but is intended to indicate its general purport.government of kerala have decided to make the state of kerala a lottery free z.this notification is intended to achieve the above object.iig.o. p no. /0/td dated thiruvananthapuram 7th $$$$.s.r.o. no. exercise of the powers conferred by sub -sections and of section of the lotteries regulation act central act of the government of kerala hereby make the following rules to repeal the kerala state lotteries regulation rules issued in g.o. p no. dated the 6th july and published as s.r.o. no. 66/00 in the kerala gazette extraordinary no. dated the 6th july as amended subsequently namely rules. short title application and commencement these rules may be called the kerala state lotteries regulation repeal rules. these rules shall apply to the whole of the state of kerala. they shall come into force at once. repeal the kerala state lotteries regulation rules is hereby repealed.by order of the governor.p. mara pandyan secretary to governmentexplanatory note(this does not form part of the notification but is intended to indicate its general purport.government of kerala by notification issued as g.o. p no. dated th $$$$ and published as s.r.o. no. in kerala gazette extraordinary no. dated th $$$$ has prohibited the sale of lottery tickets organized conducted or promoted by the government of kerala. accordingly the kerala state lotteries regulation rules has to be repealed.this notification is intended to achieve the above object.government of $$$. no. kl / tv(n)//$$$$ -gazetteextraordinarypublished by authorityvol. lvolume thiruvananthapuramnd april fridayno. vaisakha of $$$ h departmentnotificationsg.o. p no. dated thiruvanathapuram nd april.s.r.o. no. notification ii g.o. p no. dated th $$$$ published as s.r.o. no. in kerala gazette extraordinary no. dated $$$$ $$$$ prohibiting the sale of computerized and online lottery tickets in the state of kerala.and whereas by notification no. i issued as g.o. p no. dated th $$$$ and published as s.r.o. no. in the kerala gazette extraordinary no. dated the th $$$$ the government of kerala prohibited the sale of tickets of all lotteries organized conducted or promoted by every state government including that of state of kerala and declared the state as a lottery free z.now therefore in exercise of the powers conferred by section of the lotteries regulation act central act of and in partial modification of the notification issued as s.r.o. no. dated the th $$$$ the government of kerala hereby lift the prohibition partially by permitting the sale of paper lotteries organized conducted or promoted by every state government including the state of kerala provided that the prohibition imposed on the sale of computerized and online lottery tickets organized conducted or promoted by every state government shall continue to remain in force and the territory of the state of kerala shall be online internet and computerized lotteries free z.by order of the governor.p. mara pandyan secretary to governmentexplanatory note(this does not form part of the notification but is intended to indicate its general purport.government of kerala by notification issued as g.o. p no. dated 0th april have reconsidered the issue of the prohibition imposed on the sale of all lottery tickets in the state of kerala and have decided to reintroduce paper lottery conducted by the state government with the same pattern and prize structure as it prevailed before th $$$$.from a perusal of the notification dated.issued by the government of kerala we find that the state had prohibited the sale of all computerized and online lottery tickets marketed and operated through vending machines terminals electronic machines and tickets sold through internet in kerala. however by notification dated.the state had prohibited the sale of tickets of all lotteries in the state of kerala. vide notification dated.the government of kerala made the kerala state lotteries regulation repeal rules which repealed the entire kerala state lotteries regulation rules. vide another notification dated.the government of kerala lifted the prohibition of sale of paper lotteries organized conducted or promoted by every state government including the state of kerala. however the prohibition imposed on the sale of computerized and online tickets continued to remain in force. in the rules framed by the central government online lottery has been defined under rule which is as under-'online lottery means a system created to permit players to purchase lottery tickets generated by the computer or online machine at the lottery terminals where the information about the sale of a ticket and the player 's choice of any particular number or combination of numbers is simultaneously registered with the central computer server;rule permitted the state government to organize a paper lottery or online lottery or both subject to the conditions specified in the act and these rules. thus from the rules it is clear that online lottery is being treated as a separate lottery from paper lottery and it is a class in itself. in the case on hand we are mainly concerned with the provisions of section and section of the act. these sections cover different fields. section deals with prohibition of sale of tickets whereas section deals with prohibition of conduct of the lottery itself. so section enables the state government to prohibit the sale of tickets of lotteries run by every other state government. the grounds on which prohibition of sale of tickets can be made are not detailed under section. but the same can be gathered from other provisions of the act and also by reference to the $$$ and scheme of the act. going by the scheme of the act it appears that violation of any of the conditions contained in section could be a ground for the state government to prohibit the sale of tickets of a particular lottery organized conducted or promoted by any other state government. if the state government thinks it fit it may prohibit the sale of all lottery tickets in the state and make it a lottery free z. section empowers the central government to prohibit a lottery run by the state government. the central government can prohibit the running of a lottery by a state government if it is found that the same is in violation of the provisions of section. the central government can also prohibit the running of a lottery if it is found that the tickets of that lottery are sold in a state where the sale of the same has been prohibited by the concerned state government under section. in view of the above it is relevant to mention entry under list i and entry in list ii of the schedule and $$$ of the constitution of india which are as under entry list i -union list0. lotteries organized by the government of india or the government of a state.entry list ii -state list. betting and gambling.$$$ of the constitution. subject matter of laws made by parliament and by the legislatures of states.notwithstanding anything in $$$ and parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list i in the schedule in this constitution referred to as the union list.notwithstanding anything in clause parliament and subject to clause the legislature of any state also have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list iii in the schedule in this constitution referred to as the concurrent list.subject to $$$ and the legislature of any state has exclusive power to make laws for such state or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list ii in the schedule in this constitution referred to as the state list. parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of india not included in a state notwithstanding that such matter is a matter enumerated in the state list.it is common case that the parliament by virtue of entry under list i of the schedule has got exclusive power to legislate on state lotteries. by virtue of entry in the state list concerning betting and gambling state legislatures have the power to legislate on lotteries other than state lotteries because it is also of the forms of gambling16. the state of $$$ in its trading capacity has been organizing conducting and promoting online lotteries in accordance with the provisions of the act and lottery tickets are being sold in various lottery playing states in india including the state of kerala. the state of $$$ as pleaded before this court substantially depends on the revenue raised by the sale of lottery tickets. it is a north eastern state with no avenues of industrialization. it is the case of the appellants that they started the business of online lottery in the state of kerala in the year. online lottery is a tamper proof lottery which has been designed using the aid of modern technology that eliminates all the ills of paper lottery and has greater transparency and is universally recognized as a tamper proof and safe method of conducting lotteries. $$$ led to spurt of computerization satellite and internet connectivity which bears a great impact on every aspect of life made things easier and faster and brought in more transparency. thus began lottery in another form popularly called online lottery.the difference in the lotteries of this form is that online is free from possibility of any duplication tamper etc.and is totally transparent. online lotteries became popular in our country only recently. it made their presence felt in india from -onwards. though all types of lotteries are meant to be covered by the lotteries regulation act the deleterious effect of paper lotteries was uppermost in the mind of the central government while bringing forth the above legislation as at the relevant time paper lotteries were most popular among the people. the various sub -sections of section will reveal that the irregularities in the conduct of paper lotteries were mainly in the contemplation of the parliament. the decision in b.r. enterprises supra also dealt with the prohibition of sale of tickets of paper lotteries invoking power under section of the act. still the general principles laid down by this court in the abovementid case while interpreting section are binding. so the power to prohibit sale of tickets is granted in relation to a particular lottery or particular type of lottery. that means a particular lottery can be the subject -matter of prohibition. in other words all types of lotteries need not be prohibited. but going by that decision a particular type of lottery can be prohibited if only the state government also does not run that lottery. the online lottery is a particular lottery which is not run by the state government. so going by the principles laid down in b.r. enterprises supra the state government can separately ban the sale of online lotteries as online lottery is a particular class of lottery different and distinct from paper lotteries. $$$ for the appellants also brought into notice para of the writ petition filed before the high court to show how the system of online lottery functions which is as under the online lottery involves installation of a $$$ various terminals which are connected to the said $$$ through a satellite and all this involves huge expenses running into of crores. in this online lottery form there are no pre -printed tickets as such. a person interested to purchase a ticket of online lottery comes to the terminal fills a play -slip with numbers selected by him and hands it over to the person manning the terminal. this play -slip is put into the terminal and numbers selected by the player are transmitted to the central server which registers the said numbers. a person may not like to select any numbers and may play lucky dip in which case the computers makes random generation of numbers itself and transmit them to the central server which registers the said numbers. in either of the cases after the central server has registered the numbers it generates a ticket and commands the terminal which acts like a fax on command and delivers the ticket which is on an imported thermal paper. the ticket besides containing these numbers contains various codes details as also bar codes which ensures against any possibility of any duplication etc. the game is made more interesting and entertaining since the player has option to choose numbers for himself. like paper lottery in this case also various tickets can be printed and sold as such however the same may not sell at all because the player does to like to lose the charm of selecting the numbers himself. however whatever be the position all the details regarding the number of tickets sold their respective playing numbers the number to tickets sold from each terminal etc. are all available in the central server. the generation of tickets for any particular scheme closes minutes before the holding of the draw and no retail terminal can generate a ticket for such draw after such closing and at the time of draw all the details are readily available to the authorities immediately before the draw. the draw is held by the respective state themselves through a tamper free machine and is telecast on the zee television nerk and watched by the public at large. it was also contended before this court that in exercise of the powers conferred by section of the act and in partial modification of the notification issued earlier declaring kerala a lottery free z state the government lifted the prohibition partially by permitting the sale of paper lotteries and the prohibition imposed on the sale of computerized and online lotteries continued to remain in force declaring the territory of kerala to be online internet and computerized lottery free z. the legislative competence in respect of state run lotteries vests exclusively with the centre except where a state is a lottery free state and that only the central government will have the power to deal with the same. the notification dated.was issued by the state on the ground that the state of kerala shall be an online lottery free z. the state of kerala is of the view that online lottery and conventional paper lotteries are to be dealt separately and are entirely different in every aspect by the nature and features inherent in it. the state of kerala is of the view that online lottery does not characterize the features of a lottery as defined under the act. in fact the so -called online lottery is not a lottery as it is a widespread nerk using internet cheating the public in a massive way in the absence of a proper regulatory system of the same standards. the online companies are merely gaming but not conducting any lottery as per the guidelines issued under the act. it is further pleaded that though it is claimed that online lotteries are universally recognized as tamper proof lotteries in experience it is felt that the so -called online lotteries were cheating the massive gullible public by misusing the advancement of information technology in the field of economy. the government of kerala has detected and established before the union government that online lotteries organized by the state of $$$ are blatantly violating the provisions of section of the act. it was further contended that the central act was enacted by the parliament on.. at the time of formulating the act only conventional paper lottery was being conducted in the country. no online lottery existed at the time of enactment of the act. the central act did not envisage or took into account the online lotteries in the definition clause while stipulating conditions under section of the act for organizing conducting or promoting a lottery by a state government. the conditions stipulated therein are only intended to cover the conduct of paper lotteries. the government of kerala has detected the flagrant violations and fraud inherent in the online lotteries and also the illegal activities of the appellants which directly affects more than lakhs people of kerala who have already been deceived and are being continuously cheated on basis. the ill effects of these lotteries had assumed major dimensions in the state. the newspaper reports petitions from the public and reports from the police reveal the magnitude of its ill effects which include suicides divorces starvation and murders. this created more hardship to the respondent -state. the violations in terms of the act in the case of meghalaya $$$ and nagaland state lotteries have already been furnished to the union government on.and.some of which mentid by the division bench of the high court in the judgment are as follows:(a the online lottery tickets of meghalaya $$$ and nagaland states are printed by the terminal in violation of section of the lotteries regulation act the tickets of these states are printed in the statiry of the sole -selling agent.the draws are conducted in such a manner that the transparency and credibility of the draw process is not at all established. according to meghalaya rules the presence of judge shall form the quorum.the draws are conducted $$$$ in a severe gambling fashion and in violation of section and prizes are offered on the basis of a single digit violating section of the act.there are clear similarities in the name of different lotteries and they follow the same prize pattern obviously making an attempt to circumvent section.it is then pleaded that in practice the so -called online lotteries mislead the general public by its mesmeric gambling instinct inherent in it. people are attracted to the modern technology used in these lotteries and the instantaneous nature of it. they spend all their time in front of the online outlets and spoil all their my. they are being trapped by the simple prizes they get and they invest the remaining part of their my in a hope to get more and more big prizes. this is a continuous process starting from and extends too . the lotteries conducted by these online companies have draws in every minutes. technically they call it $$$$ lotteries in order to circumvent the objectives of the act but in result they are ridiculously setting aside the spirit of the act. as a technical argument each lottery has only draw in $$$$. the draw of lottery repeats only in $$$$. but the tactics followed by these states is that they are conducting more than lotteries with very strange names and by assigning pseudonyms. the online lotteries running in kerala were in flagrant violation of the provisions of the act and this fact was detected by the state of kerala. the state of kerala has made known this fact to the union government twice. the findings of the government of kerala revealed that the other states on whose behalf the lotteries are being conducted in kerala have least control over them and major source of income from these gambling type of lotteries siphd by the so -called middlemen who acts in the name of sole selling agents '. similarly the states of karnataka and arunachal pradesh have stopped the sale of online lotteries as they have admitted the violations pointed out by the state of kerala. online lotteries are being conducted under the name of other state governments circumventing the provisions of the act and also the single digit lotteries through dubious methods adopted by their distributors and agents. in some cases some lotteries except digit all other digits will be pre -fixed and the buyer has to choose only a single digit. in some other cases digit of digit number or of digit number will be changing continuously but in a pre -determined cyclic manner which shows that the draw is held only for digit. it was detected from the lottery terminals that the tickets of states of meghalaya and nagaland are being printed after another from the same terminal and the same pool in an unbroken manner. several tickets without the imprint and logo of other state governments and even without signature of the authorized officer of those states have been found being sold in the state of kerala. standard set of rules are printed on the reverse side of the statiry and tickets of more than states are being printed on the same material by the same terminal in unbroken strips. the proceeds of the sale of online lotteries are rather shared by the distributors and agents without crediting in the public account of the respective states in violation of the provisions of the act. the details of unclaimed my are not brought to the knowledge of the other state governments whereas the unclaimed prize my is being appropriated by the distributors and agents. the place of draw is not at all located within the other states whereas the same is being conducted according to the convenience of the distributors. the lottery distributors and agents of other state governments are resorting to such unscrupulous methods and conducting online lotteries in every minutes from the lottery terminals. the lottery department of the state had detected the draws being conducted in lottery outlets for more than draws in $$$$. the provisions in respect of $$$ state lotteries was reported to the ministry of home affairs government of india on.. the scheme of lotteries furnished by the government of $$$ revealed that they were not in conformity with the provisions of section of the act. the irregularities / violations in respect of the $$$ lotteries being sold in kerala in the year were brought to the notice of the state government earlier with a request for further documents / clarifications. some of these violations / irregularities are briefly mentid below i. on a perusal of the agreement between the government of $$$ and m / s. tashi delek gaming solutions pvt. ltd.the marketing agent it is seen that the agreement with the marketing agent is executed days before the $$$ online nerk lottery rules came into effect.the marketing agent is vested with powers more than what the lottery regulation act permits. the state of $$$ was asked to offer specific remarks on this.iii. since a detailed description of the method of draw was not furnished by the state of $$$ the same was called for from this office. as per rule of the $$$ online nerk lottery rules the tickets will be printed on pre -printed ticket material. on perusal of the tickets of super -lotto and thunder ball it is seen that the specimen play slips furnished by the director of lotteries $$$ bear the imprint and logo of playwin. this shows that the tickets are instantly printed at the retail computer terminal violating section of the lotteries regulation act. the contractual agreement between the play win sub -agent and the distributors was not furnished. so also the names of distributors for certain districts in kerala were not furnished.vi. the government has furnished the details of retail outlets operating in the state. but the contractual agreement between the distributor and these retail outlets were not submitted.vii. the marketing agent under the $$$ state lotteries is empowered to set -up the required infrastructure and use of technology for the draw purpose. it is clearly more than what is statutorily permissible under section of the act.viii. as per section of the central act the state government itself shall conduct the draws of all the lotteries.but actual conduct of the draws is d by the marketing agent reducing the role of the state government to that of a mere spectator thereby violating the above provision.ix. the thunderball the last prize amount of rs. is when main number and the thunder ball fixed are matched.until clarifications to the contrary are provided with evidence it has to be presumed that this is a camouflaged single digit lottery specifically prohibited under section of the central act.it was also pointed out in the letter to the government of india that $$$ has delegated more rights and responsibilities to the $$$ than what is statutorily permissible under the act. however regarding the appointment of $$$ the state of sikkim has informed that they will discuss the matter with the legal wing. the state of sikkim has admitted that the tickets are printed on playwin statiry clearly admitting violation of section of the act. with regard to the allegation that thunder ball lottery is being organized on the basis of single digit the state of sikkim has not offered any reasonable explanation or furnished any document instead the state has merely refuted the same. even though the state of sikkim was requested to furnish details / documents / clarifications regarding the allegations raised no reply was received from it. the government of sikkim was reminded on.and.to furnish the details called for earlier and also to provide details of the new lotteries introduced by them in kerala. there has been no response from the state so far. thus the violations and irregularities pointed out in respect of sikkim state lotteries as in $$$$ continue unabated. this shows that the government of sikkim is not inclined to address the serious issues pointed out by the government of kerala with regard to the illegalities and violations connected with sikkim state lottery tickets which are being sold among the public in kerala.conclusion:3. the conduct of certain types of lottery trade in the country the malpractices thereof and their impact on the poorer sections of the society have been under scrutiny of the government for quite some time. the continued prevalence of the popularly known single digit and instant lotteries and the temptation offered by them proved to be the undoing of many families especially poor $$$$ wagers and low income groups. in spite of the guidelines issued by the central government over a period of time as also the guidelines issued in the recent past by this court the evil has not been totally eliminated. the relevant provisions of the act clearly demonstrate that even though all types of lotteries are meant to be regulated by the said act online lotteries were not under the contemplation of the central government at the time when the act came into force. it is otherwise also not a disputed fact that online lotteries became popular insofar as india is concerned only recently and in any case after the enforcement of the act and that is why the government of india while framing the rules specifically defined online lotteries. having this background in mind the scheme of the act would clearly show that the government at that stage was concerned with paper lotteries of all kinds. from the preamble of the act spelled out from the statement of objects and reasons as re -produced hereinbefore the necessity to bring about legislation in the matter of regulating lotteries was felt on account of continued prevalence of single digit and instant lotteries. it was primarily d to curb malpractices in the conduct of such lotteries which at that time were paper lotteries only when the act came into force. with regard to the contention regarding the function of the online lottery we are of the considered view that any type of manipulation can be d in the printing of tickets at the terminal. the customer can not know whether the ticket is printed at the terminal based on the command from the central server or not. the state of sikkim does not have any control over its of terminals all over india. as per section of the act the draw should be held once in $$$$. it means a fortune seeker after purchasing the ticket will get a $$$$ 's cooling time to wait for the result of the draw. but under the scheme of online lotteries a number of lotteries run simultaneously. so by holding several lotteries there can be several draws with a gap of few minutes in $$$$ and the gullible will remain glued and there is every likelihood of purchase of tickets repeatedly till all his savings are exhausted. so if the government takes a decision in public interest to prohibit online lotteries this court should not interfere with the said decision unless there are compelling grounds. as held earlier going by section as interpreted by this court in b.r. enterprises supra the sale of ticket of a particular lottery can be prohibited provided the concerned state government is not running that lottery. while interpreting a statute of this nature meant to suppress the mischief of gambling this court should accept the concept of purposive interpretation and if possible save the notification intending to save the people from the vice of gambling. it is common case that lottery is a species of gambling. gambling is considered as a pernicious vice by all civilized societies from time immemorial. the rigvedas smritis and arthashastras have condemned gambling as a vice. several judges and learned authors are unanimous in their condemnation of gambling. experience has shown that the common forms of gambling are comparatively innocuous when placed in contrast with widespread pestilence of lotteries. the former are confined to a few persons and places but the latter infests the whole community it enters every dwelling it reaches every class it preys upon the hard earnings of the poor it plunders the ignorant and the simple. in words and phrases butterworths edition at page it is stated as follows it must not be entirely forgotten in the construction of these acts of parliament see now the lotteries and amusements act that the evil which the lottery law has sought to prevent was the evil which existed where poor people with only a few pence to feed their children would go and put these few pence into a lottery and lose them and this sociologically was a bad thing... even in b.r. enterprises supra this court has held as under:7. from the references from dharmashastra opinions of distinguished authors references in the encyclopaedia britcannica and boston law review and others we find that each concludes as we have observed lottery remains in the realm of gambling. even where it is state -sponsored still it was looked down upon as an evil. right from ancient time till $$$$ all expressed concern to eliminate this even where it was legalized for raising revenue either by the king or in the modern times by the state. even this legitimization was for the sole purpose of raising revenue was also for a limited period since this received condemnation even for this limited purpose. all this gives a clear picture of the nature and character of lottery as perceived through the conscience of the people as revealed through ancient scriptures also by various courts of the countries.this court further added:59...but it can not be doubted and it is recognized by all the countries that gambling by its very nature promises to make a poor man a rich man to quench the thirst of a man in dire economic distress or to a man with a bursting desire to become wealthy overnight it draws them into the magnetic field of lotteries with crippling effect. more often than not such hopes with very remote chance encourages the spirit of reckless prosperity sic propensity in him ruining him and his family. this encouraging hope with the magnitude of prize my never dwindles. losses and failures in lotteries instead of disencouragement increases the craze with intoxicating hope not only to erase the losses but to fill his imaginative coffer. when this chance mixes with this utopian hope he is repeatedly drawn back into the circle of lottery like a drug addict. inevitably the happiness of his family is lost. he goes into a chronic state of indebtedness... $$$ of the constitution of india deals with exclusive power of the parliament to make laws with respect to matters enumerated in list i union list in the schedule. as per article parliament and the legislature of any state also have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list iii concurrent list in the seventh schedule. the legislature of the state has however exclusive power to make laws with respect to matters enumerated in list ii state list in the seventh schedule as per article of the constitution. also there being a specific entry dealing with lotteries the power to legislate on lotteries would be in the exclusive domain of the parliament even though it is a form of gambling and would be generally covered under item no. of list ii state list. the parliament in exercise of the power vested in it to enact law on lotteries as per item no. of list i union list enacted the lotteries regulation act. section of the act ordains that save as otherwise provided in section no state government shall organize conduct or promote any lottery. a state government has been authorized to organize conduct or promote a lottery subject to the conditions enumerated in section which has already been re -produced earlier. it is absolutely clear that even though the power to legislate on lotteries vests exclusively with the parliament the respective states have been delegated this power but it has to be subject to conditions enumerated in section. by virtue of the provisions contained in section of the act the government may by notification in the official gazette make rules to carry out the provisions of the act. exercising the powers vested in it by the provisions contained in section the state of kerala has framed the kerala paper lotteries regulation rules. provisions of the act in particular section of the act clearly manifest that even though the power to legislate on the subject lotteries is in the exclusive domain of the parliament the power to legislate as well has been delegated by the parliament to the respective states in the country and as mentid above it is in exercise of that power the state of kerala has indeed framed the rules of. it is significant to mention that section further authorizes a state government to prohibit the sale of tickets of the lottery organized conducted or promoted by every other state. section of the act was however under a serious challenge in b.r. enterprises supra. framed in somewhat different language the challenge to section was that the delegation to the state to decide to prohibit the sale of lotteries organized by other states is a delegation by parliament of its essential legislative power without any policy or bereft of the guidelines and that there was total abdication of the legislative power of the parliament which was a naked delegation hence violative of article of the constitution of india. the counter contention raised by the states and in particular the state of tamil nadu which had banned lotteries of other states but continued to have its own was that on a plain reading of section a state without banning its own lotteries can ban lotteries organized by other states. the union of india and also the state of u.p. had raised a contention that section should be read as to entitle only such state to ban which as a policy does not permit its own lottery to run. if this be so possibly there could be no discrimination as it would apply uniformly to all the states. on the respective contentions of the learned counsel as mentid above this court framed the question as follows:81. the legal principle which emerges as submitted is that delegation of essential legislative power of the principal to the delegatee would amount to abdication of its legislative power and if it is bereft of any guidelines then it is unsustainable in the eye of the law..while dealing with the question aforesaid this court recorded reasons as to why the power had been delegated by the union to the states. it was inter alia observed as follows:83. as revealed from $$$ case -i some of the states sought permission of the union as a policy to raise their revenue through these lotteries which was conferred by the presidential order under article though it records the state could have exercised their discretion as a policy to have their own lotteries without such permission in view of its extended executive power under article. it further reveals till parliament makes any law the decision to start its lottery or to close it is exclusively within the executive power of each state. this is because it is the policy decision of a state which has to decide as a principle whether it desires to collect in this form the revenue or not. the benefit of article is it is extraterritorial applicable beyond its territory it is for this state lotteries are places in entry list i. so in a federal structure union has to play a role to coordinate between state with the other. so by regulation it has to subserve the objectives. the union can not force a state to gamble if such a state does not want to gamble. to run its own lotteries or to close it is left on the discretion of each state. it is each state which has to decide its policy and has to be concerned about its subject. in any case the union can not force any state that it must run its own lotteries. but control of state lotteries running in the territory of other states is left on the union. the state can not restrict sales of lotteries organized by other states even in its territory unless authorized by the union. this difficulty was felt by the state which is indicated in $$$ case -i. that seems to be the reason that parliament has delegated this power to the state under section... after taking into consideration the background leading to delegation of power by union to the states the question as to whether the delegation could be construed to be such as amounting to delegation of its essential legislative power and that too unguided or unbridled was examined. the question was answered as follows:8. in section lotteries are defined to be a scheme for distribution of prizes by a lot or chance. this definition itself recognizes that even in state lotteries the prizes are to be collected by chance without any skill hence gambling in nature. section prohibits that no state lotteries can be organized without the condition stipulated under $$$ a to k of section. section provides the conditions to be complied with by the state lotteries. to initiate any state lottery it is left to the policy of each state for this act is silent. the only control is in case it decides then it must follow the conditions as laid down under section. next comes section which is subject matter of challenge the delegation of power to the state to prohibit the sale of lottery tickets organized by every other state. if a state desires not to subject its people to the lottery gambling it has no power to restrict lotteries organized by other states. it is to remove this mischief that power is conferred through delegation to the states to do it in terms of their own policy. by virtue of this now the state government can prohibit sale of lottery tickets of every other state within its territory. next section seeks strict compliance with section.under this the central government may prohibit any state lottery which is being conducted in contravention of the conditions as laid down under section or section. section shows the rigour of this act by making it a penal offence as against all who violate the provisions of this act be it the head of the department of the government or the agent promoter or trader to be punishable with years rigorous imprisonment. section makes such an offence cognizable and non -bailable. similarly section deals with offences committed by the companies. section entrusts the central government power to give directions to the state government for carrying into execution the provisions of this act rule or order. sections and are the rule -making power entrusted to the central and the state governments respectively. section repeals the $$$. thus the whole act makes clear that the subject it is dealing with is gambling in nature. the object of the act is not to control the policy decision of each state to start or to close its lotteries but to regulate it in case a state decides to run its own lottery through modalities and conditions laid down therein. emphasis of the whole act is to abide by the conditions strictly if you want to run a lottery. thus regulation is through conditions to eliminate even the remotest possibility of malpractices by providing stringent measures for its compliance. perusal of the act reveals the scheme of the act is limited in its application and it admits the subject it is dealing is gambling in nature. as we have said the decision to collect or not to collect revenue through state lotteries is exclusively within the policy decision of the state and for this neither the union nor parliament interferes nor is there any indication under the act. thus the question which remains is if any state decides that it does not want any lotteries but if it feels helpless as having no jurisdiction over the lotteries organized by other states what is the way out this can only be d by parliament or by entrusting this power on such state desiring so which has been d through section. in this background for this helplessness of a state as recorded in $$$ case -i manu / sc/06/$$$$manu / sc/06/$$$$ scc the remedy is provided by entrusting this power on the state under the impugned provision. this helps such state to achieve its objective of lottery gambling free z within its territory. a well -concerned remedy. next question is what could have been the guideline if state lotteries are gambling and it can not be terms as trade and commerce at common parlance for any free right under the constitution. such right though recognized under article so other states may continue to enjoy till prohibited by valid law and if any state wants within its state lottery -free z and for which the power is entrusted to such state it can not be said in this setting and background and the nature of the subject that such a delegation is of its essential legislative power. the only guideline necessary in such delegation is to see that the state does not pick and choose state from the other which guideline is already provided in this section. it provides that such a ban could only be if it is applied to every other state. the only residual field of attack so far as this delegation could be which has been attacked in this case that the state could on hand ban lotteries of every other state but run its own lotteries. it is argued that while a state bans lotteries of other states not to permit any gambling activity in the public interest as a policy but this very public interest is flouted by having lotteries of its own. it is true that unless this provision is read down to mean a state can only ban lotteries of other states when it bans as a policy its own lotteries it is bound to be subjected to the vagaries as pointed out and on deeper scrutiny it may not successfully stand. but by reading down the provision which has to be read that it is only that state which decides lottery -free z within its state can prohibit lotteries of other states clearly provides the guidance for the exercise of such a power. it is inbuilt and inherent in the provision itself in view of the scheme of the act and nature of subject in issue. if interpretation as given on behalf of the state of tamil nadu is accepted that delegation of power is absolute then the submission that such delegation is unbridled without any guideline carries great weight. submission for the state of tamil nadu is that the lotteries may be prohibited in phases viz. while running its own lotteries yet prohibiting other lotteries may be as a public policy for law and order for political reasons morality etc. for surviving such an interpretation given by mr. ganguli parliament should have provided some guidelines. such an interpretation falls into the trap of the submission that this delegation is unbridled. so if there are interpretations the interpretation which upholds the validity should be accepted. so the interpretation as given by mr. ganguli can not be accepted. there are parts of the attack of the delegation of power to the state under section. the latter part by which it can prohibit sale of lottery tickets organized by every state which leaves no scope of any discretion on the states to discriminate from state to other. so if it decides no lottery tickets of any state to be sold it can not pick and choose from state to the other.once it as a policy decides to prohibit the sale of lottery tickets of other states it must prohibit every other state that is to say all the states and such a delegation can not be said to be either abdication of the legislative power of parliament or to be unbridled or unguided. as we have said looking to the nature of the subject and object of the act which is to help each state in its endeavor to run state lotteries which would include starting or closing its lotteries and when a state wants to have lottery -free zone in its state then such a delegation to ban lottery of every other state can not be said to be invalid. to the part there are interpretation on the plain reading of section a state may run its own lottery yet may prohibit the sale of lotteries of other states. this construction leads to discrimination and opens for criticism of unbridled delegation. the submission further is if the ban of sale of lottery tickets of every other state is as a public policy affecting the morality and resultant ill effect on its subject then there is no justification that the state may run its own lottery affecting the very subject for which the power is exercised prohibiting the lotteries of other states. it is true if such an interpretation is accepted then this submission has a force. on the other hand on behalf of the union the submission is that the language of the section has to be read down. the decision to have its lottery or not to have its lottery has to be in the public interest. every decision to have either lotteries authorized by the state or organized by the state has to be in public interest. $$$$ be for collection of public revenue or for a public purpose. it has been held in central inland water transport corporation ltd. v. brojo nath ganguly air para 93:there must be no injury or harm to the public interest public good and public welfare.thus the decision to run state lottery has to be made with the conscience sic consciousness of its evil consequences on its subject. thus before deciding the state has to equate the public welfare with the injury on its public. it may be in a given case within the limitation of its financial capacity with the need of the hour it has to decide to run its own lotteries to augment its revenue in the larger interest of the public which if weighed with the evil consequences on its subject the public welfare gains more by running it then the evil consequence on its subject has to give way till the situation changes by finding a better way for this additional source or evil consequences inflicting on its subject overweighing. this exercise has to be by each state the union not coming in its way. it is for each state to decide what is its public welfare and what constitutes an injury to the public interest. rattan chand hira chand v. $$$ holds what constitutes public interest or welfare would depend upon the time. the social milieu in which the contract is sought to be enforced would decide the factum the nature and the degree of injury. so whenever a state decides to run or not to run its lotteries it is the state which has to decide as a public policy in the public interest. once such a decision is taken to have its state lottery -free zone the entrustment of power by parliament can not be said to be ultra vires. we find on plain reading of section it empowers the state government within its state to prohibit the sale of tickets of the lotteries organized by every other state. there is also nothing in the language reading by itself so as to say whether such power can be exercised by the state while running its own lottery or can be exercised only where such state does not run its own lottery. this leads to possible interpretations as referred to above. in view of settled principle of interpretations the interpretation given by the union to read down the provision has substance. this would mean that the state could only exercise such discretion if it decides not to have any lottery within its territory including its own lottery. in this situation the delegatee is tied down by this limitation which itself is a clear guide to a state hence can not be said to be unbridled delegation. so even to the part it can not be said to be arbitrary or unbridled. so we have no hesitation to approve the interpretation given by the union to uphold the validity of section. from the observations made by this court as extracted above learned counsel representing the appellants contended that the state of kerala could not prohibit any form of lottery as long as it was running other forms of lottery of other states as also of the state of kerala. after having given anxious thought to the rival contentions we are not inclined to accept the contention raised by learned senior counsel for the appellants. it may be reiterated that the question that came to be framed by this court on the rival contentions raised by the counsel for the parties in b.r. enterprises supra was as to whether the delegation of essential legislative power of the principal to a delegatee would amount to abdication of its legislative power and if it is bereft of any guidelines then is it unsustainable in the eyes of law. this court held that if the state decides that it does not want any lotteries but if it feels helpless as having no jurisdiction over the lotteries organized by other states it can only be done by the parliament or by entrusting this power on such state desiring so which has been done through section. the remedy is provided by entrusting this power on the state under section. this would help the state to achieve its objective of lottery free zone within its territory. while dealing with the guidelines this court further observed that if a state may want it to be a lottery -free zone it could not be said that such delegation would be of essential legislative power. the only guideline necessary in such a delegation is to see that the state does not pick and choose state from the other which guideline is already provided in the section. if the ban is applied to all the states and also the state banning lotteries the contention that delegation was excessive uncanalised and unbridled would lose its sting. we are satisfied that by virtue of the provisions contained in section of the act the centre has delegated its power to legislate with regard to lotteries to states and further that there is specific delegation with regard to ban of lotteries of other states by virtue of the provisions contained in section of the act. this delegation of legislative power of the principal to the delegatee would not amount to abdication of legislative power by the centre and it would not be without any guidelines and would be sustainable in law if the concerned state may ban a lottery in its own state and of other states as well. what is true with regard to the total ban of lotteries of other states in our view would also be true with regard to a particular kind of lottery as the delegation of power has been held to be valid if the power by the delegatee may be used uniformly in its own state and also with regard to the other states. in the context of the facts and circumstances of the case as fully detailed above we hold that when the state of kerala may prohibit a particular kind of lottery from its own state it can prohibit sale of such lottery from any other state and that would not be unsustainable in the eyes of law nor it could be against law as held by this court in b.r. enterprises supra. we also hold that it is not a case of abdication of legislative power and would not be bereft of any guidelines if the legislation banning lotteries was applied uniformly. we on the interpretation of the point on the issue of delegation of essential legislative power bereft of any guidelines hold that it is not a case of abdication of the legislative power of the centre and further that if the ban on the online lottery applies uniformly it would not be a case of exercising power by a delegatee without any guidelines. in the case of the senior electric inspector supra this court while considering as to whether the doctrine of contemporanea expositio can be applied in construing acts which are comparatively modern held as under the legal position may be summarized thus the maxim contemporanea expositio as laid down by coke was applied to construing ancient statutes but not to interpreting acts which are comparatively modern. there is a good reason for this change in the mode of interpretation. the fundamental rule of construction is the same whether the court is asked to construe a provision of an ancient statute or that of a modern one namely what is the expressed intention of the legislature. it is perhaps difficult to attribute to a legislative body functioning in a static society that its intention was couched in terms of considerable breadth so as to take within its sweep the future development comprehended by the phraseology used. it is more reasonable to confine its intention only to the circumstances obtaining at the time the law was made. but in a modern progressive society it would be unreasonable to confine the intention of a legislature to the meaning attributable to the modern legislature to the meaning attributable to the modern legislature making laws to govern a society which is fast moving must be presumed to be aware of an enlarged meaning the same concept might attract with the march of time and with the revolutionary changes brought about in social economic political and scientific and other field of human activity. indeed unless a contrary intention appears an interpretation should be given to the words used to take in new facts and situations if the words are capable of comprehending them. in state v. s.j. choudhary supra this court in paragraph had referred to a passage contained in statutory interpretation by $$$ second edition for holding that the indian evidence act is by its very nature is an ongoing act. paragraph of the judgment is reproduced below:(2 it is presumed that parliament intends the court to apply to an ongoing act a construction that continuously updates its wording to allow for changes since the act was initially framed an updating construction. while it remains law it is to be treated as always speaking. this means that in its application on any date the language of the act though necessarily embedded in its own time is nevertheless to be construed in accordance with the need to treat it as current law.in the comments that follow it is pointed out that an ongoing act is taken to be always speaking. it is also further stated thus in construing an ongoing act the interpreter is to presume that parliament intended the act to be applied at any future time in such a way as to give effect to the true original intention. accordingly the interpreter is to make allowances for any relevant changes that have occurred since the act 's passing in law social conditions technology the meaning of words and other matters. just as the us constitution is regarded as a living constitution so an ongoing british act is regarded as a living act. that $$$$ 's construction involves the supposition that parliament was catering long ago for a state of affairs that did not then exist is no argument against that construction. parliament in the wording of an enactment is expected to anticipate temporal developments. the drafter will try to foresee the future and allow for it in the wording.an enactment of $$$$ is thus to be read $$$$ in the light of dynamic processing received over $$$$ with such modification of the current meaning of its language as will now give effect to the original legislative intention. the reality and effect of dynamic processing provides the gradual adjustment. it is constituted by judicial interpretation year in $$$$ out. it also comprises processing by executive officials. similarly in sil import usa supra this court has again reiterated as follows:16. francis bennion in statutory interpretation has stressed the need to interpret a statute by making allowances for any relevant changes that have occurred since the act 's passing in law social conditions technology the meaning of words and other matters. for the need to update legislations the courts have the duty to use interpretative process to the fullest extent permissible by the enactment. the following passage at p. of the above book has been quoted with approval by a -judge bench of this court in state v. s.j. choudhary it is presumed that parliament intends the court to apply to an ongoing act a construction that continuously updates its wording to allow for changes since the act was initially framed an updating construction. while it remains law it is to be treated as always speaking. this means that in its application on any date the language of the act though necessarily embedded in its own time is nevertheless to be construed in accordance with the need to treat it as current law. with the ongoing development in the field of science and technology even though the online lotteries were not in vogue in when the parliament had passed the act it came into existence at a later point of time. the principles laid down by this court in b.r. enterprises supra would apply to the paper lotteries which were in existence at that point of time. the principles laid down therein would also apply to online lotteries or internet lotteries by treating them as a separate class. the principle laid down therein is that if the state government has to prohibit any lottery organized conducted or promoted by every other state it has to prohibit the sale of its own lottery also. meaning thereby if a paper lottery is being prohibited by a particular state then that paper lottery has to be prohibited as a whole. likewise if online or internet lottery is to be prohibited by a state then that online lottery or internet lottery of all states including that state also has to be prohibited. viewed from this angle we are of the considered opinion that state of kerala was well within its rights to prohibit the sale of online or internet lotteries in its state and there is no fault in it. it is well within the powers conferred on it under section of the act. a state government can organize conduct or promote a lottery subject to conditions mentioned in section and if there is any violation of the conditions mentioned in section it would be always open to the state government to prohibit such lottery and that would be within the legislative power vested with the state under section of the act as in that case the state would be only complying with the provisions of the act made by the parliament. the learned single judge while examining the facts of the case manner and method in which the sale of online lotteries are conducted has already held that it violates the provisions contained in section of the act. in fact during the course of arguments no effort was made to dislodge the findings recorded by the courts below. the view adopted from the observation made by this court in b.r. enterprises supra in any case is possible. in our considered opinion learned single judge of the high court rightly mentioned in his judgment that in fairness it must be conceded that section in the light of the interpretation in b.r. enterprises supra admits interpretations. is that the state can prohibit any form of lottery if only it is not running any lottery at all. the interpretation is that the state can prohibit a particular form of lottery if it is not running that form of lottery even if it is running other types of lotteries. the act has been designedly made to suppress the mischief of lottery. therefore we feel that an interpretation which advances the object of the act should be favoured. that means the state can prohibit online lotteries if it is not running the said type of lotteries. the decision in b.r. enterprises supra which was dealing with the prohibition of paper lotteries does not stand in the way of accepting such an interpretation. accordingly the main challenge against the impugned notification that it violates section of the act is repelled. in view of the foregoing discussion we do not find any infirmity in the order passed by the division bench of the high court dated.consequently the appeals and the writ petitions fail and are accordingly dismissed. however the parties are left to bear their own costs.