p. venkatarama reddi j. the opinion recorded by the kerala high court in itr no. of has given rise to this appeal filed by the chief commissir of income -tax. the dispute relates to the assessment year -. at the instance of the revenue the following question was referred under section of the income tax act for the opinion of the high court:"whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case the tribunal is right in law and fact in holding that rs.  can not be brought to tax and in doleting the addition of rs.  sustained by cit appeals)?"the high court accepted the view of the tribunal which partly allowed the appeal of the assessee and answered the question in favour of the assessee. the facts in brief are the respondent -assessee is engaged in the business of tea spices etc. during the assessment year -previous year ending on.the assessee wrote -back in its accounts a sum of rs. representing the provision made during $$$$ -towards its purchase tax liability. it appears that the liability to pay purchase tax on certain goods was in dispute and therefore the provision was made. further it appears that the assessee in support of its claim for purchase tax relief inter alia relied on the decision of the kerala high court in neroth oil mills ' case. the slp filed by the kerala state against the decision of the high court in the said case was rejected by this court in november. apparently for that reason the assessee thought it fit to reverse the provision made earlier towards purchase tax and therefore made the entries in the books of account during $$$$ ending on.. the assessing officer added the sum of rs. which represents the provision made towards purchase tax during the assessment years --and -treating the same as the income of $$$$ ending on.. in the appeal the cit appeals held that there was no justification to include the sums which were already included in the course of reassessments made for $$$$s -and -. however he upheld the addition of rs.  pertaining to the assessment year -. the appellate commissir held that the liability of the assessee finally ceased during $$$$ -in view of the rejection of slp in neroth oil mills ' case in november. certain observations were also made as regards the inflexibility of the sums pertaining to assessment years -and -in respect of which reassessments were made. however in this appeal we need not go into the details thereof. on further appeal by the assessee the tribunal set aside the addition of rs.  which was upheld by the appellate commissir. the tribunal did not agree with the view taken by the appellate authority that there was no cessation of liability within the meaning of section of the income -tax act during $$$$ on account of dismissal of slp in another case. the tribunal observed that for claiming exemption from purchase tax on the ground that transaction was in the course of export conditions were required to be fulfilled things purchased and exported are and the same and the purchases were against firm orders for export. neroth oil mills'case was concerned only with the aspect and not the aspect. therefore the tribunal observed that the judgment in neroth oil mills ' case even if it had attained finality does not put an end to the disputed issue involved in the respondent -assessee 's case. the tribunal further noticed that as late as the sales tax department was pursuing the issue relating to purchase tax liability of the assessee from the assessment year -onwards and the cases were still pending decision before the sales tax authorities. the tribunal pointed out that he unilateral action on the part of the assessee in writing -back the amounts could not have the effect of extinguishing the statutory liability. on reference the high court approved the view taken by the tribunal and held that section can not be invoked in the instant case. hence this appeal by revenue by special leave. it may be noted that the provision was made in the books of account towards purchase tax which was under dispute and the benefit of deduction from business income was availed of in $$$$ in relation thereto. the same was sought to be reversed by the assessee during $$$$ ending on.for whatever reason it be. the question is whether the circumstances contemplated by section exists so as to enable the revenue to take back what has been allowed earlier as business expenditure and to include such amount in the income of the relevant assessment year i. -. in order to apply section in the context of the facts obtaining in the present case the following points are to be kept in view in the course of assessment for $$$$ allowance or deduction has been made in respect of trading liability incurred by the assessee subsequently a benefit is obtained in respect of such trading liability by way of remission or cessation thereof during $$$$ in which such event occurred in that situation the value of benefit accruing to the assessee is deemed to be the profit and gains of business which otherwise would not be his income and such value of benefit is made chargeable to income tax as the income of $$$$ wherein such benefit was obtained. the high court agreeing with the tribunal rightly held that the resort to section could arise only if the liability of the assessee can be said to have ceased finally without the possibility of reviving it. on the facts found by the tribunal the tribunal as well as the high court were well justified in coming to the conclusion that the purchase tax liability of the assessee had not ceased finally during $$$$ in question. despite the finality attained by the judgment in neroth oil mills'case the other issues having bearing on the exigibility of purchase tax still remained and the dispute between the assessee and the sales -tax department was still going on. there is no material on record to rebut these factual observations made by the tribunal. nor can it be said that the reasons given by the tribunal are irrelevant. the learned senior counsel appearing for the income tax department has contended that the assessee itself took steps to write -off the liability on account of purchase tax by making necessary adjustments in the books which itself is indicative of the fact that the liability ceased for all practical purposes and therefore the addition of amount of rs. deeming the same as income of the year -under section is well justified of the act. but what the assessee has done is not conclusive. as observed by the tribunal an unilateral action on the part of the assessee by way of writing -off the liability in its accounts does not necessarily mean that the liability ceased in the eye of law. in fact this is the view taken by this court in cit v. suguli sugar works(p ltd. $$$ / sc/00/1999$$$ / sc/00/1999. we therefore find no substance in the contention advanced on behalf of the appellant. incidentally we may mention that the controversy relates to the period anterior to the introduction of explanation to section. the decision of this court in commissioner of income tax v. t.v. sundaram iyengar and sons ltd. manu / sc/1251/1996manu / sc/1251/1996 has been cited by the learned counsel for the appellant. we find no relevance of this decision to the determination of the question involved in the present case. the factual matrix and the provision of law considered therein is entirely different. for the reasons aforesaid we affirm the opinion expressed by the high court and dismiss the appeal filed by the revenue. there shall be no order as to costs.