. by order dated.we had issued the following directions $$$. the term high dignitaries used in proviso iii)to rule of the rules takes within its fold the holders of various posts positions and offices specified in the constitution. the motor vehicles carrying high dignitaries specified by the central government and their counterparts specified by the state government may be fitted with red lights but the red lights with or without flasher can be used only while the specified high dignitary is on duty and not otherwise. the state governments and administration of union territories can not enlarge the scope of the term high dignitaries beyond what is prescribed in clauses c and 'd of $$$ dated.and.issued by the central government. therefore they shall amend the relevant rules and notifications to bring them in tune with the rules and notifications dated.and.issued by the central government. this exercise must be completed within $$$$ months. the men in uniform operational agencies which require un -hindered access to the roads for performance of their duty those engaged in emergency duties such as ambulance services fire services emergency maintenance etc. and police vehicles used as escorts or pilots or for law and order duties shall not be entitled to have red lights but lights of other colours.g.blue white multi -coloured etc. no motor vehicles except those specified in rule of the rules or similar provisions contained in the rules framed by the state governments or the administration of union territories shall be fitted with multi -toned horns giving a succession of different notes or with any other sound producing device giving an unduly harsh shrill loud or alarming noise. the police officers and other authorities entrusted with the task of enforcing the provisions of the act and the rules framed thereunder must discharge their duties without any fear or favour and should impose appropriate penalty on those who violate the prohibition contained in rule and rule and similar rules framed by the state governments and the administration of union territories. the owners / users of the vehicles fitted with multi -toned horns other than those allowed to use such horns under rule of the rules or corresponding rules framed by the state governments and the administration of the union territories shall within a period of month from $$$$ remove the multi -toned horns. the officers authorised to enforce the provisions of the act and the rules framed thereunder by the central government the state governments and the administration of union territories shall also ensure that multi -toned horns are removed from all the vehicles except those specified in rule of the rules or corresponding rules framed by the state governments and the administration of union territories. the chief secretaries of all the states and the administrators of union territories shall cause a notice published in the newspapers having wide circulation in their respective states and the union territories incorporating the directions contained in this order.in the note submitted by the learned solicitor general it has been mentioned that clause of the motor vehicles amendment $$$ contains a provision for imposition of enhanced penalty. that amendment is not shown to have been carried out so far. we hope and trust that the legislature will make appropriate amendment and make provision for imposition of adequate penalty which may operate as deterrent against misuse of the provisions of the act and the rules generally and the provisions of rules and in particular. the state governments and the administration of the union territories shall either amend the existing rules or frame appropriate rules for imposing deterrent penalty on the violators of the rules containing prohibition against the use of red lights and multi -toned horns or similar devices.now an application i.a. no. of has been filed by the applicant -national capital territory of delhi wherein they have requested to modify our earlier order dated.and permit persons engaged in emergency duty such as ambulance fire services emergency maintenance police and armed forces to use red light / beacon on the vehicles also besides other colour depending on their operational requirements. the prayer so made by the applicant is not seriously opposed by $$$ n. $$$ learned amicus curiae. keeping in view the request made in the application in our opinion if the prayer made in the application is granted it would not cause any prejudice to the $$$ or any other person. in that view of the matter we modify our order dated.and permit persons engaged in emergency duty such as ambulance fire services emergency maintenance police and armed forces to use red light / beacon on the vehicles also besides other colour depending on their operational requirements. we are informed by $$$ n. $$$ learned amicus curiae that till date only states have filed their reply affidavits before this court pursuant to the directions issued by this court. if any other state wants to file reply they can do so before the final hearing of the matters. list these matters on a non -miscellaneous day in the month of april.