arijit pasayat j. notwithstanding my profound respect for brother $$$ 's erudition i am unable to agree with his conclusions. while dealing with an accused tried under the tada certain special features of the said $$$ need to be focused. it is also necessary to find out the legislative intent for enacting it. it defines terrorist acts in section with reference to section and in that context defines a terrorist. it is not possible to define the expression terrorism in precise terms. it is derived from the word terror. as the statement of objects and reasons leading to enactment of the tada is concerned reference to the terrorist and disruptive activities prevention act hereinafter referred to as the old act is necessary. it appears that the intended object of the said act was to deal with persons responsible for escalation of terrorist activities in many parts of the country. it was expected that it would be possible to control the menace within $$$$ years and life of the act was restricted to the period of years from the date of its commencement. but noticing the continuance of menace that too on a larger scale tada has been enacted. menace of terrorism is not restricted to our country and it has become a matter of international concern and the attacks on the world trade center and other places on th $$$$ amply show it. attack on the parliament on december shows how grim the situation is. tada is applied as an extreme measure when police fails to tackle with the situation under the ordinary penal law. whether the criminal act was committed with an intention to strike terror in the people or section of people would depend upon the facts of each case. as was noted in jayawant dattatray suryarao etc. v. state of maharashtra etc. $$$ / sc/070/00$$$ / sc/070/00 for finding out the intention of the accused there would hardly be a few cases where there would be direct evidence. it has to be mainly inferred from the circumstances of each case. in hitendra vishnu thakur and ors. v. state of maharashtra and ors. $$$ / sc/0/$$$ / sc/0/ this court observed that the legal position remains unaltered that the crucial postulate for judging whether the offences a terrorist act falling under act or not is whether it was d with the intent to overawe the government as by law established or to strike terror in the people etc. a terrorist activity does not merely arise by causing disturbance of law and order or of public order. the fall out of the intended activity is to be that it travels beyond the capacity of the ordinary law enforcement agencies to tackle it under the ordinary penal law. it is in essence a deliberate and systematic use of coercive intimidation. as was noted in the said case it is a common feature that hardened criminals $$$$ take advantage of the situation and by wearing the cloak of terrorism aim to achieve acceptability and respectability in the society because in different parts of the country affected by militancy a terrorist is projected as a hero by a group and often even by many misguided youth. as noted at the outset it is not possible to precisely define terrorism. finding a definition of terrorism has haunted countries for $$$$. a attempt to arrive at an internationally acceptable definition was made under the league of nations but the convention drafted in never came into existence. the un member states still have no agreed -upon definition. terminology consensus would however be necessary for a single comprehensive convention on terrorism which some countries favour in place of the present piecemeal conventions and protocols. the lack of agreement on a definition of terrorism has been a major obstacle to meaningful international countermeasures. cynics have often commented that state 's terrorist is another state 's freedom fighter. if terrorism is defined strictly in terms of attacks on non -military targets a number of attacks on military installations and soldiers ' residences could not be included in the statistics. in order to cut through the gordian definitional knot terrorism expert a. schmid suggested in in a report for the then un crime branch that it might be a good idea to take the existing consensus on what constitutes a"war crime as a point of departure. if the core of war crimes -deliberate attacks on civilians hostage taking and the killing of prisrs -is extended to peace time we could simply define acts of terrorism as"peace time equivalents of war crimes. league of nations convention all criminal acts directed against a state along with intended or calculated to create a statute of terror in the minds of particular persons or a group of persons or the general public.ga. / measures to eliminate international terrorism)". strongly condemns all acts methods and practices of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable wherever and by whomsoever committed;. reiterates that criminal acts intended or calculated to provoke a state of terror in the general public a group of persons or particular persons for political purposes are in any circumstances unjustifiable whatever the considerations of a political philosophical ideological racial ethnic religious or other nature that may be invoked to justify them. short legal definition proposed by a.p. schmid to united nations crime branch act of terrorism = peacetime equivalent of war crime. academic consensus definition:"terrorism is an anxiety -inspiring of repeated violent action employed by semi- clandestine individual group or state or actors for idiosyncratic criminal or political reasons whereby -in contrast to assassination -the direct targets of violence are not the main targets. the immediate human victims of violence are generally chosen randomly targets of opportunity or selectively(representative or symbolic targets from a target population and serve as message generators. threat- and violence -based communication processes between terrorism organization),(imperiled victims and main targets are used to manipulate the main target audience s turning it into a target of terror a target of demands or a target of attention depending on whether intimidation coercion or propaganda is primarily sought schmid,.definitions:. terrorism by nature is difficult to define. acts of terrorism conjure emotional responses in the victims those hurt by the violence and those affected by the fear as well as in the practitirs. even the u.s. government can not agree on single definition. the old adage man 's terrorist is another man 's freedom fighter is still alive and well. listed below are several definitions of terrorism used by the federal bureau of investigation.terrorism is the use or threatened use of force designed to bring about political change. -brian jenkinsterrorism constitutes the illegitimate use of force to achieve apolitical objective when innocent people are targeted. -walter laqueur.terrorism is the premeditated deliberate systematic murder mayhem and threatening of the innocent to create fear and intimidation in order to gain a political or tactical advantage usually to influence an audience. -james m. polandterrorism is the unlawful use or threat of violence against persons or property to further political or social objectives. it is usually intended to intimidate or coerce a government individuals or groups or to modify their behavior or politics. -vice president 's task force is the unlawful use of force or violence against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a government the civilian population or any segment thereof in furtherance of political or social objectives. -fbi $$$. the main plea of accused -appellant is that there was no corroboration to the alleged confessional statement. various circumstances according to him clearly show that it was not voluntary.strong reliance is placed in state v. nalini and ors. $$$ / sc/0/$$$ / sc/0/ to contend that corroboration is necessary. it is to be noted that legislature has set different standards of admissibility of a confessional statement made by an accused under the tada from those made in other criminal proceedings. a confessional statement recorded by a police officer not below the rank of superintendent of police under section of the tada is admissible while it is not so admissible unless made to the magistrate under section of the indian evidence act in short the evidence act. it appears consideration of a confessional statement of an accused to a police officer except to the extent permitted under section of the evidence act is not permissible. these aspects are noted by this court in sahib singh v. state of haryana $$$ / sc/0/7$$$ / sc/0/7 and gurdeep singh 's case supra. there is common feature both in section of the tada and section of the evidence act that the confession has to be voluntary. section of the evidence act interdicts a confession if it appears to the court to be the result of any inducement threat or promise in certain conditions. the principle there in is that confession must be voluntary. section of the tada also requires the confession to be voluntary. $$$ means that who makes it out of his own free will inspired by the sound of his own conscience to speak nothing but the truth. as per stroud 's $$$ $$$n.at p. threat means.it is the essence of a threat that it be made for the purpose of intimidating or overcoming the will of the person to whom it is addressed per $$$ j.woodv. bowron qb cited intimidate.words and phrases permanent $$$ition vol. defines voluntary as $$$ means a statement made of the free will and accord of accused without coercion whether from fear of any threat of harm promise or inducement or any hope of reward -. state v. mullin nw loan.at p. confession is defined as:"where used in connection with statements by accused words voluntary and involuntary import statements made without constraint or compulsion byothers and the contrary. $$$ wealth v. chin kee( ne mass.in words and phrases by $$$. $$$.vol. p. voluntary is defined as...the classic statement of the principle is that lord summer in ibrahim v. regem ac atp. where he said it has long been established as a positive rule of english criminal law that no statement by an accused is admissible in evidence against himunless it is shown by the prosecution to be a voluntary statement in the sense that it has not been obtained from him either by fear of prejudice or hope of advantage exercised or held out by a person in authority. the principle is as old as lord $$$.however in of the text books cited to us..support is to be found for a narrow and rather technical meaning of the word voluntary. according to this view voluntary means merely that the statement has not been made in consequence of some promise of advantage of some threat ii of a temporal character(iii held out or made by a person in authority and iv)relating to the charge in the sense that it implies that the accused 's position in the contemplated proceedings will or may be better or words according to whether or not the statement is made.r. v. $$$ r. v. power all er at pp. per cantley v.so the crux of making a statement voluntarily is what is intentional intended enameled by other influences acting on 's own will through his own conscience. such confessional statements are made mostly out of athirst to speak the truth which at a given time predominates in the heart of the confessor which impels him to speak out the truth. internal compulsion of the conscience to speak out the truth normally emerges when is in despondency or in a perilous situation when he wants to shed his cloak of guilt and nothing but disclosing the truth would dawn on him. it sometimes becomes so powerful that he is ready to face all consequences for clearing his heart. as was observed in $$$ 's case supra tada was enacted to meet extra ordinary situation existing in the country. its departure from the law relating to confession as contained in the evidence act is deliberate. section of the evidence act deals with confession caused by inducement threat or promise which is irrelevant in criminal proceedings. the expression confession has not been defined in the evidence act. broadly speaking it is an admission made at any time by a person charged with crime stating or suggesting the inference that he committed that crime. $$$ relating to confessions is to be found generally in section to of the evidence act and sections and of the code of criminal procedure hereinafter described as old code")corresponding to identical provisions of code of criminal procedure 7(described as code hereinafter. confession is a species of admission. a confession or admission is evidence against maker of it if its admissibility is not excluded by some provision of law. $$$ is clear that a confession can not be used against an accused persons unless the court is satisfied that it was voluntary. at that stage question whether it is true or false does not arise. if the facts and circumstances surrounding the making of a confession appear to cast a doubt on the voluntariness of the confession the court may refuse to act upon the confession even if it is admissible in evidence. the question whether a confession is voluntary or not is always a question of fact. a free and voluntary confession is deserving of highest credit because it is presumed to flow from the highest sense of guilt. in principle and digest of $$$ of evidence volume i new $$$ition by chief justice m. monir after noticing conflicting views and discussing various authorities the learned author summarized the position as follows:"the rule may therefore be stated to be that whereas the evidence in proof of a confession having been made is always to be suspected the confession if once proved to have been made and made voluntarily is of the most effectual proofs in the law. as was noted in gurdeep singh 's case supra whenever an accused challenges that his confessional statement is not voluntary the initial burden is on the prosecution for it has to prove that all requirements under section of tada and rule of terrorist and disruptive activities(prevention rules hereinafter referred to as rule have been complied with. once this is d the prosecution discharges its burden and then it is for the accused to show and satisfy the court that the confessional statement was not made voluntarily. the confessional statement of the accused can be relied upon for the purpose of conviction and no further corroboration is necessary if it relates to the accused himself. it has to be noted that in nalini 's case supra by majority it was held that as a matter of prudence the court may look for some corroboration if confession is to be used against a co -accused though that will be again within the sphere of appraisal of evidence. it is relevant to note that in nalini 's case supra the court was considering the permissibility of conviction of a co -accused on the confessional statement made by another accused. in this case we are concerned with the question as to whether the accused making the confessional statement can be convicted on the basis of that al without any corroboration. the following observations in jayawant dattatray 's case supra are relevant:"confessional statement before the police officer under section of the tada is substantive evidence and it can be relied upon in the trial of such person or co -accused abettor or conspirator for an offence punishable under the act or the rules. the police officer before recording the confession has to observe the requirement of sub -section of section. irregularities here and there would not make such confessional statement in admissible in evidence. if the legislature in its wisdom has provided after considering the situation prevailing in the society that such confessional statement can be used as evidence it would not be just reasonable and prudent to water down the scheme of the act on the assumption that the said statement was recorded under duress or was notrecorded truly by the concerned officer in whom faith is reposed. it is true that there may be some cases where the power is misused by the concerned authority. but such contention can be raised in almost all cases and it would be for the court to decide to what extent the said statement is to be used. ideal goal may be confessional statement is made by the accused as repentance for his crime but for achieving such ideal goal there must be altogether different atmosphere in the society. hence unless a fool -proof method is evolved by the society or such atmosphere is created there is no alternative but to implement the law as it is.underlined for emphasis)7. $$$ counsel for the appellant has tried to show that the witnesses examined have given lie to some parts of the confessional statement like hiring of the room purchase of the car etc. it is true that the witnesses have not spoken about the role of the appellant in the alleged trans actions. but as was rightly submitted by learned counsel for the respondent the very fact that these witnesses have stated about the identity given by the perspective tenants the purchase of the car are factors which do not go in favour of the appellant but against him. otherwise how would be accused -appellant in his confessional statement state about the identity disclosed by the perspective tenant and purchase of the car. $$$ counsel for the appellant contended that these facts had come to knowledge of the police prior to the apprehension of the accused -appellant and therefore they have utilized their previous knowledge and put it in the confessional statement. such a contention has to be noticed to be rejected. once it is held that the confessional statement is voluntary it would not be proper to hold that the police has incorporated certain aspects in the confessional statement which were gathered in the investigation conducted earlier. it is to be noted further that the appellant 's so called retraction was long after he was taken into judicial custody. while he was taken to judicial custody on.after $$$$ he made a grievance about the statement having been forcibly obtained. this is clearly a case of after -thought. since the confessional statement was voluntary no corroboration for the purpose of its acceptance is necessary. other aspects were highlighted to raise doubt about authenticity of prosecution version. the are circumstances about the alleged attempt to swallow the cyanide pill non -dispatch of the confessional statement to the acmm or the cjm and the typed certificate given by the officer recording the evidence when under rule()(b of the rules requirement is a certification under his own hand. it is to be noted that $$$. pw/b is the copy of the personal search memo of the accused and serial no. refers to cyanide capsules. merely because no statement has been made by witnesses about the attempt to swallow the cyanide that does not in any way dilute the evidence recording seizure of a cyanide capsule from the accused -appellant. mention about the cyanide capsule in the confessional statement goes along way to show that the statement was truthful. so far as the alleged non -dispatch of the confessional statement is concerned evidence of pw.b. $$$ asj is significant. on.he was working as acm new delhi. an application $$$. pw./a was put up before him by acp $$$.s. $$$ p.w. regarding request for recording statement under section of the tada made by of the accused -appellant. he was also produced before the acm who asked him whether his confessional statement was recorded on.by $$$.s. bola pw.he answered in the affirmative and his signatures were also obtained on the application in confirmation of his admission having made a statement before the dcp. when the accused was produced before the acm he did not make any grievance that his confessional statement was not in fact recorded as claimed or that his signatures were obtained on blank pieces of paper as claimed latter. such a plea was raised after a long passage of time. it is further relevant to note that when the accused was produced in court he never made any grievance about any duress or coercion. it is to be noted that the confessional statement was sent directly to the designated court and was received at.p. merely because the report was sent directly to the designated court it does not become a suspicious circumstance. rather it adds to the authenticity of the document. it has been noted by the learned trial judge that the accused was produced in court only at.p. and the confessional statement had reached the designated court before that time. the purpose of the confessional statement being sent to the court by producing the accused for confirmation of the statement is to ensure that interpolation or manipulation is ruled out at $$$$. as noted above the confessional statement in this case had been sent to the designated court before producing the accused before the acmm. that being so in the absence of any prejudice to the accused non -dispatch of the confessional statement to the acm is really of no consequence. in any event the prescription regarding despatch is directory and not mandatory. in jayawant dattaray 's case supra a similar contention was rejected. it was observed that as per rule what is mandatory is that the confessional statement should be forwarded to the designated court which may take cognizance of the offence. violation if any in the matter of dispatch to the chief judicial magistrate can not be held to be incurable illegality. see re wariyam singh and ors. v. state of u.p. $$$ / sc/007/$$$ / sc/007/ airsc. the other aspect on which great emphasis has been laid by learned counsel for the appellant is regarding the manner of recording of the confessional statement. evidence of pw -asi kamlesh is of great importance. the confessional statement runs into pages. the witness has categorically stated that she had recorded the confessional statement on computer as per the diction of the dcp. in her cross -examination she has stated that the time taken was hours. the accused has taken a stand that his signatures were taken on blank papers. as noted above the accused never made a grievance about any deficiency in the confessional statement till.. that is of great significance. merely because the confessional statement was recorded in a computer it can not be a ground for holding that the confessional statement was not voluntary. similarly as dcp has given a certificate in typing when the requirement is that certificate has to be under his own hand that is urged to be illegal. it would be too technical to discard the confessional statement or doubt it sauthenticity on that score. this is merely a procedural requirement. the non -observance does not cause any prejudice to the accused. it has not been shown as to how the accused was prejudiced by the certificate having been typed. procedure is hand made and not the mistress of law intended to subserve and facilitate the cause of justice and not to govern or obstruct it. like all rule of procedure the requirement of recording under his own hand demands an approach which would be rational and practical and not otherwise. such minor deficiency if any can not be considered to be a fatal factor so far as prosecution case is concerned. there is more important aspect which needs to be noted. admittedly the accused was a fugitive and was on the run. at the india gandhi international airport he was arrested for travelling on a forged passport. it has been accepted by the accused in his statement recorded under section of the code that he had sought asylum in germany and was deported from there on refusal of asylum. as the records reveal $$$.s. $$$ pw.brought to the notice of shri b.s. bhola pw.that on.the accused wanted his statement to be recorded under section of the tada and requested shri b.s. bhola pw.to do the needful. $$$ talked to the accused after sending every except his p.a. pw.out of the room and asked him whether he was making a statement without any fear or duress etc. he was also intimated that the statement could be used in evidence against him. despite that the accused wanted his statement to be recorded. $$$ had given time to the accused till.. the i.o. was directed to produced the accused on $$$$ at.p. on.the accused was again produced in the office of $$$ lodhi estate. he was asked whether the statement was voluntary or under pressure. after ensuring that all procedures and safe guards have been observed the statement was recorded. a mere statement that requisite procedures and safe guards were not observed or that statement was recorded under duress or coercion is really of no consequence. such a stand can be taken in every case by the accused after having given the confessional statement. it could not be shown as to why the officials would falsely implicate the accused. there is a statutory presumption under section of the evidence act that judicial and official acts have been regularly performed. the accepted meaning of section is that when an official act is proved to have been d it will be presumed to have been regularly d. the presumption that a person acts hstly applies as much in favour of a police officer as of other persons and it is not judicial approach to distrust and suspect him without good grounds therefore. such an attitude can do neither credit to the magistracy nor good to the public. it can only run down the prestige of police administration.see $$$ v. state of saurashtra $$$ / sc/00/$$$ / sc/00/. it has been highlighted by the accused that because of co -accused 's acquittal the case of conspiracy highlighted by the presentation gets demolished. section ipc is the provision which provides for punishment for criminal conspiracy. definition of criminal conspiracy given in section reads as follows:"-a- when or more persons agree to do or cause to be d-( an illegal act or( an act which is not illegal by illegal means such an agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence shall amount to a criminal conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is d by or more parties to such agreement in pursuance thereof. the element of a criminal conspiracy have been stated to be an object to be accomplished a plan or scheme embodying means to accomplish that object an agreement or understanding between or more of the accused persons whereby they become definitely committed to co -operate for the accomplishment of the object by the means embodied in the agreement or by any effectual means in the jurisdiction where the statute required an overt act. the essence of a criminal conspiracy is the unlawful combination and ordinarily the offence is complete when the combination is framed. from this it necessarily follows that unless the statute so requires no overt act need be d in furtherance of the conspiracy and that the object of the combination need not be accomplished in order to constitute an indictable offence. $$$ making conspiracy a crime is designed to curb immoderate power to do mischief which is gained by a combination of the means. the encouragement and support which co -conspirators give to another rendering enterprises possible which if left to individual effort would have been impossible furnish the ground for visiting conspirators and abettors with condign punishment. the conspiracy is held to be continued and renewed as to all its members wherever and whenever any member of the conspiracy acts in furtherance of the common design. see american jurisprudence vol. ii section p. for an offence punishable under section prosecution need not necessarily prove that the perpetrators expressly agree to do or cause to be d illegal act the agreement may be proved by necessary implication. offence of criminal conspiracy has its foundation in an agreement to commit an offence. a conspiracy consists not merely in the intention of or more but in the agreement of or more to do an unlawful act by unlawful means. so long as such a design rests in intentionally it is not indictable. when agree to carry it into effect the very plot is an act in itself and an act of each of the parties promise against promise actus contra actum capable of being enforced if lawful punishable if for a criminal object or for use of criminal means. no doubt in the case of conspiracy there can not be any direct evidence. the ingredients of offence are that there should be an agreement between persons who are alleged to conspire and the said agreement should be for doing an illegal act or for doing illegal means an act which itself may not be illegal. therefore the essence of criminal conspiracy is an agreement to do an illegal act and such an agreement can be proved either by direct evidence or by circumstantial evidence or by both and it is a matter of common experience that direct evidence to prove conspiracy is rarely available. therefore the circumstances proved before during and after the occurrence have to be considered to decide about the complicity of the accused. in halsbury 's laws of england vide th $$$.vol. page para the english law as to conspiracy has been stated thus-"conspiracy consists in the agreement of or more persons to do an unlawful act or to do a lawful act by unlawful means. it is an indictable offence at common law the punishment for which is imprisonment or fine or both in the discretion of the court.the essence of the offence of conspiracy is the fact of combination by agreement. the agreement may be express or implied or in part express and in part implied. the conspiracy arises and the offence is committed as soon as the agreement is made and the offence continues to be committed so long as the combination persists that is until the conspiratorial agreement is terminated by completion of its performance or by abandonment or frustration or however it may be. the actus reus in a conspiracy is the agreement to execute the illegal conduct not the execution of it. it is not enough that or more persons pursued the same unlawful object at the same time or in the same place it is necessary to show a meeting of minds a consensus to effect an unlawful purpose. it is not however necessary that each conspirator should have been in communication with every other. there is no difference between the mode of proof of the offence of conspiracy and that of any other offence it can be established by direct or circumstantial evidence. see $$$ etc. v. state of maharashtra air sc. privacy and secrecy are more characteristics of a conspiracy then of a loud discussion in an elevated place open to public view. direct evidence in proof of a conspiracy is seldom available offence of conspiracy can be proved by either direct or circumstantial evidence. its not always possible to give affirmative evidence about the date of the formation of the criminal conspiracy about the persons who took part in the formation of the conspiracy about the object which the objectors set before them selves as the object of conspiracy and abut the manner in which the object of conspiracy is to be carried out all this is necessarily a matter of inference. the provisions of sections and ipc have brought the law of conspiracy in india in line with the english law by making the overt act unessential when the conspiracy is to commit any punishable offence. the english law on this matter is well -settled. $$$ on crime( $$$. vol.p.may be usefully noted-"the gist of the offence of conspiracy then lies not in doing the act or effecting the purpose for which the conspiracy is formed nor in attempting to do them nor in inciting others to do them but in the forming of the scheme or agreement between the parties agreement is essential. more knowledge or even discussion of the plan is not per se enough. $$$ in the criminal law $$$ p.question arose in an low a case but it was discussed in terms of conspiracy rather than of accessoryship. d who had a grievance against p. told e that if he would whip p some would pay his fine. e replied that he did not want any to pay this fine. that he had a grievance of his own against p and that he would whip him at the opportunity. e whipped p. d was acquitted of conspiracy because there was no agreement for concert of action no agreement to co -operate. coleridge j while summing up the case to jury in regina v. $$$ er at p. states:"i am bound to tell you that although the common design is the root of the charge it is not necessary to prove that these parties came together and actually agreed in terms to have this common design and to pursue it by common means and so to carry it into execution. this is not necessary because in many cases of the most clearly established conspiracies there are not means of proving may such thing and neither law nor common sense requires that it should be proved. if you find that these persons pursued by their acts the same object often by the same means performing part of an act so as the complete it with a view to the attainment of the object which they were pursuing you will be at liberty to draw the conclusion that they have been engaged in a conspiracy to effect that object. the question you have to ask your selves is. had they this common design and did they pursue it by these common means the design being unlawful. as noted above the essential ingredient of the offence of criminal conspiracy is the agreement to commit an offence. in a case where the agreement is for accomplishment of an act which by itself constitutes an offence then in that event no overt act is necessary to be proved by the prosecution because in such a situating criminal conspiracy is established by proving such an agreement. where the conspiracy alleged is with regard to commission of a serious crime of the nature as contemplated in section 0b read with the proviso to sub -section of section 0a then in that event more proof of an agreement between the accused for commission of such a crime al is enough to bring about conviction under section 0b and the proof of any overt act by the accused or by any of them would not be necessary. the provisions in such a situation do not require that each and very person who is a party to the conspiracy must do some overt act to wards the fulfillment of the object of conspiracy the essential ingredient being an agreement between the conspirators to commit the crime and if these requirements and ingredient s are established the act would fall with in the trapping of the provisions contained in section 0b see s.c. $$$ v. state of bihar $$$ / sc/000/$$$ / sc/000/. the conspiracies are not hatched in open by their nature they are secretly planned they can be proved even by circumstantial evidence the lack of direct evidence relating to conspiracy has no consequence. seee.k. chandrasenan v. state of kerala $$$ / sc/00/$$$ / sc/00/. in kehar singh and ors. v. state delhi administration $$$ / sc/0/$$$ / sc/0/ this court observed-"generally a conspiracy is hatched in secrecy and it may be difficult to adduce direct evidence of the same. the prosecution will often rely on evidence of acts of various parties to infer that they were d in reference to their common intention. the prosecution will also more often rely upon circumstantial evidence. the conspiracy can be undoubtedly proved by such evidence direct or circumstantial. but the court must enquire whether the persons are independently pursuing the same end or they have come together to the pursuit of the unlawful object. the former does not render them conspirators but the latter does. it is however essential that the offence of conspiracy required some king of physical manifestation of agreement. the express agreement however need not be proved. nor actual meeting of the persons is necessary. nor it is necessary to prove the actual words of communication. the evidence as to transmission of thoughts sharing the unlawful design may be sufficient. conspiracy can be proved by circumstances and other materials. see state of bihar v. paramhans $$$ / bh/0/$$$ / bh/0/ pljr. to establish a charge of conspiracy knowledge about indulgence in either an illegal act or a legal act by illegal means is necessary. in some cases intent of unlawfuluse being made of the goods or service in question may be inferred form the knowledge itself. this apart the prosecution has not to establish that a particular unlawful use was intended so long as the goods or service in question could not be put to any lawful use. finally when the ultimate offence consists of a chain of actions it would not be necessary for the prosecution to establish to bring home the charge of conspiracy that each of the conspirators had the knowledge of what the collaborator would do so so long as it is known that the collaborator would put the goods or service to an unlawful use see state of maharashtra v. som nath thapa.lj at p.. where trust worthy evidence establishing all links of circumstantial evidence is available the confession of a co -accused as to conspiracy even without corroborative evidence can be taken into consideration. see baburao bajirao patil v. state of maharashtra $$$ / sc/007/7$$$ / sc/007/7 7)scc. it can in some cases be inferred for the acts and conduct of parties. see $$$ joshi and ors. v. state of maharashtra and ors. $$$ / sc/0/7$$$ / sc/0/7. it is submitted that benefit of doubt should be given on account of co -accused 's acquittal. $$$aggerated devotion to the rule of benefit of doubt must not nurture fanciful doubts or lingering suspicions and there by destroy social defence. justice can not be made sterile on the plea that it is better to let guilty escape than punish an innocent. letting guilty escape is not doing justice according to law. see gurbachna singh v. stapal singh and ors. $$$ / sc/00/0$$$ / sc/00/0. prosecution is not required to meet any and every hypothesis put forward by the accused. see state of u.p. v. $$$ / $$$ / sc/0/. if a case is proved perfectly it is argued that it is artificial if a case has some flaws inevitable because human beings are pr to err it is argued that it is too in perfect. wonders whether in the meticulous hyper sensitivity to eliminate a rare innocent form being punished many guilty persons must be allowed to escape. proof beyond reasonable doubt is a guideline not a fetish. see inder singh and anr. v. state delhi administration $$$ / sc/0/7$$$ / sc/0/7. vague hunches can not take place of judicial evaluation. a judge does not preside over a criminal trial merely to see that no innocent man is punished. a judge also presides to see that a guilty man does not escape. both are public duties.per $$$ in stirlant v. director of public prosecution quoted in state of u.p. v. $$$ / sc/00/$$$ / sc/00/. when considered in the aforesaid background the plea that acquittal of co -accused has rendered prosecution version brittle has no substance. acquittal of co -accused was on the ground of non- corroboration. that principle as indicated above has no application to accused himself. it has been pleaded that prosecution has failed to place any material to show as to why accused would make a confessional statement immediately on return to india. acceptance of such a plea would necessarily mean putting of an almost impossible burden on the prosecution to show something which is within exclusive knowledge of the accused. it can be equated with requiring the prosecution to show motive for a crime.  can not normally see into the mind of another. what is the emotion which impels another to do a particular act is not expected to be known by another. it is quite possible the said impelling factors would remain un -discoverable. after all the factors are psychological phenomenon. no proof can be expected in all cases as to how mind of the accused worked in a particular situation. above being the position learned trial judge has rightly held the appellant to be guilty. coming to the question of sentence of death as awarded by the learned trial judge the same has to be judged in the background of what was stated by this court in several cases. from bachan singh v. state of punjab $$$ / sc/0/0$$$ / sc/0/0 and $$$ and ors. v. state of punjab $$$ / sc/0/$$$ / sc/0/ the principle culled out is that when the collective conscience of the community is so shocked that it will expect the holders of the judicial power center to inflict death penalty irrespective of their personal opinion as regards desirability or otherwise of retaining death penalty same can be awarded. it was observed:"the community may entertain such sentiment in the following circumstances:-( when the murder is committed in an extremely brutal grotesque diabolical revolting or dastardly manner so as to arouse intense and extreme indignation of the community.when the murder is committed for a motive which evinces total depravity and meanness.g. murder by hired assass in for my or $$$ cold -blooded murder of against of a person vis -a -vis whom the murderer is in a dominating position or in a position of trust or murder is committed in the spouse for betrayal of the motherland.when murder of a member of a scheduled $$$ or minority community etc.is committed not for personal reasons but in circumstances which arouse social wrath or in cases of bride burning or dowry deaths or when murder is committed in order to remarry for the sake of extracting dowry once again or to marry another woman on account of infatuation.when the crime is enormous in proportion. for instance when multiple murders say of all oral most all the members of a family or a large number of persons of a particular caste community or locality are committed.when the victim of murder is an innocent child or a helpless woman or old or infirm person or a person vis -a -vis whom the murderer is in a dominating position or a public figure generally loved and respected by the community.if upon taking an over all global view of all the circumstances in the light of the aforesaid propositions and taking in to account the answers to the questions posed by ways of the test for the rarest of rare cases the circumstances of the case are such that death sentences warranted the court would proceed to do so. as the factual scenario of the present case shows at least persons died several persons were injured a number of vehicle caught fire and were destroyed on account of the perpetrated acts. the dastardly acts were diabolic in conception and cruel in execution. the terrorists"who are sometimes described as death merchants have no respect for human life. innocent persons lose their lives because of mindless killing by them. any compassion for such persons would frustrate the purpose of enactment of tada and would amount to misplace and unwarranted sympathy death sentence is the most appropriate sentence in the case at hand and learned trial judge has rightly awarded it. however a question arises as to the effect of brother shah j. holding the accused innocent while deciding the question of sentence. observations made by this court in $$$ v. state of assam $$$ / sc/07/$$$$$$$ / sc/07/$$$$ are relevant. it was inter alia observed as follows:-"but a question that remains to be considered further is the effect of conclusion arrived at by my learned brother mr. justice $$$. is the accused remediless that remains to be seen. few provisions in the code of criminal procedure for short the others in the constitution deal with such situation. sections and of the code and articles and of the constitution deal with pardon. article of the constitution confers upon the president power to grant pardons reprieves respites or remission of punishment or to suspend remit or commute sentence of any person of any offence. the power so conferred is without prejudice to the similar power conferred on the governor of the state. article of the constitution confers upon the governor of a state similar powers in respect of any offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the state extends the power under article and article of the constitution is absolute and can not be fettered by any statutory provision such as sections and the code or by any prison rules.section of the code empower the appropriate government to suspend or remit sentences. the expression appropriate government means the central government in cases where the sentences or order relates to the matter to which the executive power of the union extends and the state government in other cases. there lease of the prisrs condemned to death in exercise of the powers conferred under section and article of the constitution does not amount to interference with due and proper cause of justice as the power of the court to pronounce upon the validity propriety and correctness of the conviction and sentence remain unaffected. similar power as that contained in section of the code or article of the constitution can be exercised before during or after trial. the power exercised under section of the code is largely an executive power vested in the appropriate government and by reducing the sentence the authority concerned thereby modifies that judicial sentence. the section confines the power of the government to the suspension of the execution of the sentence or remission of the whole or any part of the punishment. section of the code give no power to the government to revise the judgment of the court. it only provides power of remitting the sentence. remission of punishment assumes the correctness of the conviction and only reduces punishment in part or whole. the word remit"as used in section in not a terms of art. some of the meanings of the word remit are to pardon to refrain from inflicting to give up. it is there fore no obstacle in the way of the president or governor as the case may be in remitting the sentence of death. a remission of sentence does not mean acquittal.the power to commute a sentence of death is independent of section. the restriction under section of the code comes into operation only after power under scion is exercised. section is applicable to categories of convicts those who could have been punished with sentence of death and those whose sentence has been converted into imprisonment for life under section. it was observed in $$$ v. union of india $$$ / sc/0/0$$$ / sc/0/0 that section does not violate article of the constitution.in the circumstances if any motion is made in terms of section and of the code and/or article or article of the constitution as the case may be the same may be appropriately dealt with. it goes without saying that at the relevant stage the factors which have weighed with my learned brother mr. justice $$$ can be duly taken note of in the context of section of the code.the principles set out above have application to the present case. there is no reason to interfere with the order of learned trial judge. the appeal deserves to be dismissed which sic direct. reference as made for confirmation of death sentence imposed under section is accepted.b.n. agrawal j. i respectfully agree with brother pasayat j.order of the court3. the conviction and sentence passed by the trial court stands confirmed by dismissal of the appeal filed by the accused -appellant and the death reference is accordingly answered.m.b. shah j. by judgment and order dated.in sessions case no. of the designated court- new delhi convicted the appellant for the offence punishable under section of terrorist and disruptive activities prevention act hereinafter referred to as the tada and section 0b read with section and of the indian penal code and sentenced him to death and also to pay a fine of rs. he was also sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for years for the offence punishable under section and of tada and to pay a fine of rs. against the judgment and order the appellant has filed criminal appeal no. of and for confirmation of death sentence the state has filed death reference case crl.no. of before this court. it is the prosecution version that on.mr. m.s. $$$ the then president of indian youth congress i was in his office at raisina road new delhi. at about.p.mr. $$$ left the office and the car in which he was travelling came out of the main gate of raisina road and pilot car in which security personnel provided to him were sitting was a head of his car. the pilot car slowed down in order to take right turn on raisina road. in the mean time bus came on raisina road from the side of winds or place. at the time there was an explosion in a car parked outside raisina road though mr. $$$ was not hurt badly a number of other vehicles parked on the road and footpath caught fire. because of the bomb blast persons succumbed to the injuries and other persons sustained injuries. during the course of investigation it was learnt the kuldeep $$$ $$$ $$$ pal singh and $$$ all members of klf a terrorist organisation were behind this blast and their aim was to assassinate mr. $$$. it is the further prosecution version that secret information was received that appellant $$$ who was in custody of german authorities was to come to delhi from frankfurt on .. on his arrival he was handed over to igi airport police authorities by lufthansa airlines staff. immediately upon his arrest he tried to swallow cyanide capsule. however he was prevented. other accused $$$ who was extradited from usa to india was also arrested. he was also tried along with the appellant but was acquitted by the designated court on the ground that there was no evidence against him and that he has not made any confessional statement. the court also observed that there was no iota of material on record to corroborate confessional statement made by accused $$$ pal singh against his co -accused $$$ and prudence requires that in absence of corroboration benefit should go to $$$. in this appeal learned counsel for the appellant submitted that except the so called confessional statement there is no other evidence against the appellant and the said confessional statement is neither voluntary nor true and in any case there is no corroborative evidence. hence the judgment and order passed by the designated court convicting the appellant requires to be set aside. for appreciating the contention raised by the learned counsel for the appellant the relevant evidence led by the prosecution is required to be considered. it is the say of pw37 inspector severaia kujur that on.he was posted at immigration airport and at the time of clearance of flight lh-70 at about.a.the staff of lh flight handed over $$$ who was deported from germany. he was interrogated by pro vigilance and sb branch and it was found that he was having forged passport so he made a rukka under sections ipc and section of the passport act. further pw83 $$$ $$$ $$$ new delhi has also stated that on.he was posted in igi airport as sub inspector and that accused $$$ who was deported from germany was arrested in case fir no. of for the offences punishable under sections and of the ipc and section of the passport act. during the course of interrogation in the said case he made a disclosure statement. he has also stated that personal search was conducted and that travelling documents were recovered from the accused. along with the disclosure statement and personal search memo he was handed over to acp k.s. $$$ who conducted the investigation of this case. incross -examination he has denied that $$$ had not made any disclosure statement and that this signatures were obtained on blank sheets. now as against this we have to consider the evidence ofpw mr. k.s. $$$ acp. it is his say that on the relevant date he was posted in operation cell $$$. he received information that an klf extremist namely davender pal singh @ deepak has been detained in germany in the last week of december he was trying to get released from there and that he would proceed to pakistan or he may be deported to india. he along with other officers went to igi airport to check the incoming passengers from frankfurt germany. at.a.lufthansa airlines staff handed over the accused who was having forged travelling documents to pw. he tried to swallow a capsule in plastic foil which was caught and after this he disclosed that his name was $$$. on that basis igi airport staff registered a case vide fir no. dated.. it is his further say that on that date he made disclosure statement describing his involvement in many cases including a bomb blast at raisina road. therefore he collected the copy of the disclosure statement $$$.pw83/a and made his formal arrest in the present case. he produced the accused before shri b.b. $$$ acmm new delhi and secured his police remand for. he was interrogated on.and accused again made a disclosure statement in which he admitted his involvement in the bomb blast at raisina road. on.he gave in writing that he wanted to make confession. there after he informed mr. b.s. bola dcp(pw for recording the confessional statement. mr. bola after following the procedure recorded his confessional statement on rdjanuary. on th january he was produced before the court of acmm new delhi before the expiry of police custody remand and from there the accused was taken by the punjab police. in cross -examination mr. $$$ has stated that he was not having any prior information that accused was being deported from germany to india but he had g to igi airport for checking the passengers coming from germany in the expectation that the accused might have been deported. he also admitted that in pursuance of the disclosure statement $$$.pw83/ no article was recovered from the accused or a this pointing out. he further stated that there is no recovery memo pertaining to the car recovered from bulandshahar on the judicial file. however there is a reference about the car in a photocopy of dd no. dated.of ps bulandshahar. this dd was not brought by him. he denied the suggestion that the involvement of the accused persons was within the knowledge of police prior to.. he also admitted that on.the dcp used the computer installed in his office for recording the statement of the accused. he also admitted that he had given a wireless message informing the punjab police that accused would be produced before the court on.and that is how the punjab police had sough this police remand. he has denied the suggestion that accused was forced to make a false confessional statement before the dcp and the accused was deliberately produced prior to the expiry of police remand and was sent to punjab. he admits that thereafter accused remained in police custody for more than months in punjab. in further cross -examination he has stated that he had not produced the copy of the confessional statement or the original before the learned acmm when the accused was produced before him. he also admitted that before the accused was produced before acmm on.he was formally arrested by the police of police station sriniwas puri. he also admitted that investigating officers of the case pertaining to p.s. sriniwaspuri and punjab police were present inside the court when the accused was produced before the acmm. he has denied the suggestion that accused was put under fear and duress or that he was warned not to reveal the true circumstances under which the confessional statement was recorded or that in case he so reveals he would be d to death by punjab police. pw mr. b.s. bola dcp recorded the confessional statement of accused. in the cross -examination he has admitted that he was aware about the entire facts of the case prior to the recording of the statement of the accused under section of tada. the prosecution also led the evidence of pw3 asi kamlesh who recorded the confessional statement on the computer as per the dictation of accused which is running into pages. she has admitted in cross -examination that during the period of hours when his statement was recorded accused was not provided any water or snacks and the matter typed out on the computer was not saved nor it was taken on a floppy. the prosecution has also examined pw33 mr. b.b.chaudhary asi tis hazari delhi who was acmm new delhi at the relevant time stated that accused was produced before him when he was in police custody. he asked only question to the accused whether his statement was recorded by dcp on.that accused answered in affirmative and his signatures were obtained on the application in confirmation of his admission of having made a statement before the dcp. he admitted that he had not asked any other question. it is his say that he did not think it necessary to take the accused to his chamber to assess is mental state. he also admitted that at that time no statement of accused was produced before him. from the aforesaid evidence led by the prosecution questions that arise for consideration are -i whether the confessional statement is true and voluntary and whether there is any corroboration to the said statement?8. before considering the evidence led by the prosecution it is to be stated that accused in his statement recorded under section.p.c. stated that he had sought asylum in germany and was deported from there on refusal of asylum. he has denied recovery of cyanide capsule from him. he has also denied having made the application $$$.pw/b expressing desire to make a confessional statement. he has also denied having made the confessional statement before mr. bola on.. according to him he was made to sign some blank and partly written papers under threat and duress and entire proceedings were fabricated upon those documents. he has also stated that before he was produced before the acmm he was told that if he made any statement to the court he would behanded over to punjab police who would kill him in an encounter and as he was under fear he made a statement before learned acmm. he has also stated that he was taken to punjab and brought back after about months and there after he sent an application from jail on.retracting his confessional statement and clarifying the circumstances under which the said statement was recorded. it is apparent that investigating officer mr. k.s. $$$ has improved his version by stating that accused tried to swallow cyanide capsule when he was arrested. as against this it is the say of pw37 severaia kujur and pw83 inspector tej singh that accused was handed over to him by the staff of lufthansa airlines and nowhere they stated that at that time accused tried to swallow any pill. it appears that mr. k.s. $$$ tried to give colour to the story that appellant tried to swallow the cyanide pill. if that story was genuine necessary panchnama of the cyanide pill would have been made at the spot. further it is admitted position on record that during the course of investigation of the bomb blast the police had learnt that kuldeep $$$ $$$ $$$ pal singh and $$$ who were members of klf a terrorist organisation were behind the blast. therefore it would be difficult to believe that the io mr. $$$has g to the airport only for keeping a watch. on the contrary of involvement of accused and his group in the bomb blast case. therefore the version of mr. $$$ that he had g at the igi airport to check the incoming passengers from frankfurt germany can not berelied upon. from the evidence of dcp mr. bola it is apparent that information was received that accused was coming from germany and therefore a watch at igi airport was kept. apart from the aforesaid improvement it is difficult to believe that the accused who was arrested for travelling on a forged passport after landing at the airport would make a disclosure statement involving himself in various crimes including the bomb blast. there was no earthly reason to make such disclosure on th itself so that accused could be arrested by mr. k.s. $$$ for the alleged involvement in the offence under the tada. it is also admitted that when the accused was produced before acmm the confessional statement was not produced for the perusal of the acmm and the acmm only asked him the question whether he admits making confessional statement before dcp b.s. bola. it would be difficult to accept that if confessional statement was recorded and when the accused was produced before the magistrate he would be taken there without the said confessional statement. rule of tada requires that every confession recorded under section shall be sent forthwith to the cmm or the cjm having jurisdiction over the area in which such confession has been recorded and such magistrate shall forward the confession so received to the designated court which may take cognizance of the offence. in this view of the matter there was no reason to produce the accused before the acmm without so -called confessional statement. further sub -section of section of tada specifically provides inter alia that in case confession made by a person before the police officer is recorded by such police officer either in writing or on any mechanical device like cassettes tapes or sound tracks from out of which sounds or images can be reproduced shall be admissible in trial of such person for an offence under this act or rules made thereunder. the confessional statement was recorded on computer and floppy thereof is not produced in the court and is admitted to have not been saved in the computer by asi kamlesh. from the aforesaid evidence it is apparent that the confessional statement of the appellant is recorded by dcp b.s. bola pw)who was the investigating officer at the relevant time. admittedly the accused was in police custody. $$$ he was handed over to the punjab police. further from the record it appears that accused was wanted in bomb blast case since and as soon as he arrived at the igi airport he was arrested and was handed over to pw30 mr.k.s. $$$ acp. it is stated that mr. $$$ also recorded the disclosure statement of the appellant on.where in he admitted his involvement in the bomb blast case. $$$ confessionalstatement under section of the tada was recovered by dcp b.s.bola. in such state of affairs doubt may arise whether the accused has made any confessional statement at all. in kartar singh v. state of punjab $$$ / sc/00/1$$$ / sc/00/1 this court observed thus:-"though it is entirely for the court trying the offence to decide the question of admissibility or reliability of a confession in its judicial wisdom strictly adhering to the law it must while so deciding the question should satisfy itself that there was no trap no track and no importune seeking of evidence during the custodial interrogation and all the conditions required are fulfilled. in such case it would be unsafe to solely rely upon the alleged confession recorded by investigating officer. further looking at the original confessional statement there appears to be some substance in what is contended by the accused in his statement under section.p.c. that his signatures were taken on blank paper. under rule1(3)(b of the tada rules the police officer who is recording the confession has to certify the same under his own hand that the said confession was taken in his presence and recorded by him and at the end of confession he has to give certificate as provided there under. in the present case the certificate was not given under the hands of d.c.p.but was a typed. further for finding out whether the statement is truthful or not there must be some reliable independent corroborative evidence. in the present case co -accused $$$ who was tried together with the appellant was acquitted on the ground that there was no evidence against him and that as he had not made any confessional statement. however for connecting the appellant the learned judge has relied upon the decision in gurdeep singh v. state(delhi admn.$$$ / sc/01/1$$$ / sc/01/1 for holding that when the confessional statement in voluntary corroboration is not required. it appears that the court has not read the entire paragraph of the said judgment and has missed the previous lines which read the aforesaid reasons and on the facts and circumstances of this case we have no he citation to hold that the confessional statement of the appellant is not only admissible but was voluntarily and truthfully made by him on which the prosecution could rely for his conviction. such confessional statement does not require any further corroboration. before reliance could be placed on such confessional statement even though voluntarily made it has to be seen by the court whether it is truthfully made or not. however in the present case we are not called upon nor is it challenged that the confessional statement was not made truthfully. from the aforesaid judgment it is clear that before solely relying upon the confessional statement the court has to find out whether it is made voluntarily and truthfully by the accused. even if it is made voluntarily the court has to decide whether it is made truthfully or not. but in gurdeep singh 's case supra there was no challenge made to the fact that it was not made truthfully. in the confessional statement it is mentid that accused hired rooms at sahibabad jaipur at bangalore. merely because some house numbers are mentid in confessional statement it can not beheld that as house numbers are found by police officers it is a corroborative piece of evidence. n of the neighbours has deposed before the court that the accused stayed in the said houses. to write such numbers is easy for investigating officers because they were investigating the case from the date of the bomb blast i. since.no independent witnesses or landlord came forward to depose that accused resided in the said premises or took it on lease. no incriminating articles were found from the said house or places mentid in confession to connect the accused with the crime. even pw80 harcharan singh who sold the car which was seized at the scene of offence in has not stated that appellant -accused purchased the said car or that acquitted accused $$$ purchased the same. pw $$$ property dealer of sahibabad ghaziabad stated that in august he had arranged a house on rent basis for boys who told them selves to be working as contractor in g.d.a. he also filed to identify accused as the boys who came a this shop to take the premises on rent. on.the police came to him and informed that some rdx was recovered from that house shown some photographs to him and he identified photographs of the said person. however he has not identified the accused as the boy who came at his shop to take the premises on rent. similarly pw $$$ who was running a shop of electrical goods at lajpat nagar had sold water pump to a customer residing in lajpat nagar. the police came to his show -room and pointed some photographs for identification of the person who had purchased the water pump. he had identified the photograph of that person. however in the court he refused to identify the accused as the customer who had purchased the water pump from his shop. in any set of circumstances let us consider the confessional statement as it is. in the present case other accused d.s. lahoria was tried along with the appellant and was acquitted. the role assigned to d.s. lahoria in the confessional statement in major . in the confessional statement appellant devenderpal singh has stated a sunder:-"i was born in jullandar on....i completed pre -engineering examination from layal pur khalsa college jullandhar in and joined b.e. in the mechanical at guru nanak engineering college $$$ and completed my degree course in...in $$$$.police came to know about the names of the boys who were behind the car bomb attack on ssp / chandigarh and the police raided the house partap singh where dr. hari singh and videshi had stayed day before the blast. partap singh further disclosed that they are also known to me.. the police raided my house. i was not present in the house. my father and father -in -law were arrested by the police... i was told that he along with partap singh $$$ want $$$ and $$$ @ pal r / o village kadia distt. batala and mangal singh are wanted in ssp / chandigarh bomb blast case. there after i went under ground and talked to my maternal uncle $$$ in vencouver canada who advised me that the chances of release of his father are very minimum as the case relates to $$$ and that he should also go underground.in august plans were chalked out to eliminate m.s. $$$ because $$$ felt that he is speaking to much against their movement and the militants. $$$ along with charni went to punjab and took out quintal of rdx and left it with $$$ @ chajju at $$$. they came backand sent harnaik @ chottu to bring this rdx to their sahibabad hideout. part of this consignment was brought by $$$ which was handed over to kuldeep keepa at delhi karnal border. harnaik @chotu got the steel container fabricated for the bombs. $$$ went to purchase an ambassador $$$ which was subsequently used in the bomb blast. the cordless teleph was purchased from ludhiana by harnaik. on nd $$$$ kuldeep keepa and navneet kadian conducted the recede of the office of ms $$$ at rai sina road new delhi. $$$$ kuldeep keepa navneet sukha@ sangat puria harnaik lahoria and myself again came to the office of $$$ to watch the proceedings. we made attempts on th and th $$$$.on th $$$$ the mechanism did not work and we could not trigger and blast. on th $$$$ $$$ did not come to the office. my self and kuldeep keepa fixed the bombs in the rear seat and the dickey and the master receiver of the teleph was placed on the rear seat. the wires coming out the receiver were connected to the detonators. around kgs of rdx was used in the blast.on.we came to the office of $$$ at around a. and the car was parked close to the front gate. navneet keepa and sangatpuria were waiting in the back side of parking of meridian hotel alongwith gypsy no. dnc-1790 which was a fake number. i went to connaught place to bring harnaik @chotu with whom the time was fixed $$$$. in the mean while ms $$$ went inside his office and we could not trigger off the blast as n of us were in position. we decided to go back but when we reached pragati maidan keepa insisted on making another try. we reached janpath hotel and connected the wires in the parking area and sent lahoria to park the car near the gate of the office. the other of us went in the gypsy and parked it in the parking area in front of chelmsford club. harnaik and myself got down from gypsy and went towards the office of ms $$$. i positid myself on the opposite side of the office and harnaik positid himself close to the walls of $$$ to save himself from the blast. when lahoria came out of the car after parking immediately thereafter the cars of ms $$$ started moving out and lahoria gave a signal to harnaik who pushed the button of the hand set of the cordless teleph. the security car of ms $$$ was hit and $$$ 's car which was behind was not damaged. since lahoria was very closed he was hit any splinters on his back. harnaik and myself went to the parked gypsy from where sukha had already come towards rai sina road new delhi to see whether any of us had been injured or not. kuldeep and navneet were already sitting in the gypsy. of us left the place and dropped navneet at the back of meridian hotel to come by bus or auto -rickshaw because he was a sikh and possibility of identification was more strong. lahoria went to the hospital in auto rickshaw and registered himself under the name of vk sod and left the hospital immediately after aid. he went his hide out which is not known to me. there is nothing on record to corroborate the aforesaid confessional statement. police could have easily verified the hospital record to find out whether d.s. lahoria went to the hospital and registered himself under the name of v.k. sood on the date of incident and left the hospital after getting first aid. in any set of circumstances n of the main culprits i. harnaik or lahoria is convicted. in these set of circumstances without there being corroborative evidence it would be difficult to solely rely upon the so -called confessional statement and convict the accused and that too when the confessional statement is recorded by the investigating officer. for this purpose it would be worth -while to refer to the decision in to pandas v. state of bombay manu / sc/003/1955manu / sc/003/1955 -"criminal conspiracy has been defined in section code:"when or more persons agree to do or cause to be d an illegal act or an act which is not illegal by illegal names such an agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy.by the terms of the definition itself there ought to be or more persons who must be parties to such an agreement and it is trite to say that person al can never be held guilty of criminal conspiracy for the simple reason that can not conspire with self. if therefore named individuals were charged with having committed the offence under section 10b penal code and if out of these were acquitted of the charge the remaining accused who was the accused no. in the case before us could never be held guilty of the offence of criminal conspiracy. the court further discussed the aforesaid question and referred to the decision in r. v. plummer $$$ c and held as under:-$$$$ $$$ c which is cited in support of this proposition was a case in which on a trial of indictment charging persons jointly with conspiring together person had pleaded guilty and a judgment passed against him and the other were acquitted. it was held that the judgment passed against who had pleaded guilty was bad and could not stand. lord justice $$$ observed at p. is much authority to the effect that if the appellant had pleaded not guilty to the charge of conspiracy and the trial of all defendants together had proceeded on that charge and had resulted in the conviction of the appellant and the acquittal of the only alleged co -conspirators no judgment could have been passed on the appellant because the verdict must have been regarded as repugnant in finding that there was a criminal agreement between the appellant and the others and n between them and him see--'harison v. errington pos d where upon an indictment of for riot were found not guilty and guilty and upon error brought it was held a void verdict and said to be like to the case in hen c.conspiracy against and only of them is found guilty it is void for al can not conspire. in this view of the matter when rest of the accused who are named in the confessional statement are not convicted or tried this would not be a fit case for convicting the appellant solely on the basis of so -called confessional statement recorded by the police officer. finally such type of confessional statement as recorded by the investigating officer can not be the basis for awarding death sentence. in the result criminal appeal no. of filed by the accused is allowed and the impugned judgment and order passed by the designated court convicting the appellant is set aside. the accused is acquitted for the offences for which he is charged and he is directed to be released forth with if not required in any other case. in view of the above death reference case crl.no. of would not survive and stands disposed of accordingly.