$$$ j. leave granted. general elections to the legislative assembly of madhya pradesh took place in the year. on.shri ajay arjun singh hereinafter referred to as the returned candidate was declared elected as a member of legislative assembly from churhat assembly constituency in the said election. on 0th january challenging the declaration of said ajay arjun singh of the contesting candidates $$$ hereinafter referred to as the election $$$ filed an election petition no. of before the high court of madhya pradesh. the election of the returned candidate was challenged on the grounds that the returned candidate is guilty of commission of corrupt practices falling under sub -sections and of section of the representation of the people act hereinafter referred to as the rp act i. making appeal to the voters in the name of religion and bribery and incurring expenditure in contravention of section of the rp act respectively. notice to the respondents in the election petition was ordered on th february. the returned candidate was served with the said notice on.. admittedly the election petition and all the annexures thereto were served on the returned candidate on his appearance in the court on.. on st july the returned candidate filed la. no. of invoking order vii rule of code of civil procedure hereinafter referred to as or vii rule petition praying that the election petition be dismissed on the ground that it does not disclose a cause of action. the said petition was dismissed by order of the high court dated.. aggrieved by the dismissal of or vii rule petition the returned candidate filed an application for review i.a. no. referred to as the review petition which was also dismissed by the high court by an order dated.. therefore the returned candidate filed slps no. and aggrieved by orders dated.and.respectively. aggrieved by certain findings recorded by the high court the details of which will be considered later in the order dated.in the review petition the election $$$ preferred slp no.. to adjudicate the correctness of the various impugned orders an examination of the issues which fell for the consideration of the high court is required to be identified. the prayer in the or vii rule petition filed by the returned candidate is as follows it is therefore prayed that the present election petition be dismissed.para of the or vii rule petition reads as follows that besides the above affidavit sworn and filed along with the petition by the $$$ is not in conformity with form of the conduct of election rules. the name of the corrupt practice has not been specified which is required to be specifically stated in the affidavit prescribed under form no. the affidavit which the $$$ has filed is thus defective and therefore the petition deserves to be dismissed.para of the said petition states that for the aforesaid reasons the present election petition is liable to be dismissed as the as do not disclose any cause of cause of action.giving some allowance to the clerical errors we presume that the returned candidate prayed that the election petition be dismissed on the ground that it does not disclose any cause of action.in other words the returned candidate prayed that the election petition be dismissed for reasons:(i that the affidavit filed along with the election petition is not in conformity with form of the conduct of election rules $$$ that the election petition does not disclose any cause of action.they are distinct grounds. in response to the said application or vii rule petition the election $$$ filed a reply dated.. it is stated in para therein as follows:. that the objection which respondent no.  candidate has raised with respect to the non filing of the affidavit inconformity of the form of the conduct of election rules. the $$$ has filed the said affidavit along with the election petition which is attached at page no. and of the election petition and also found mention at serial no. in the index filed along with the election petition. since the $$$ has also filed affidavit in support of the election petition and has also filed the affidavit in prescribed format therefore there is no defect in this regard. though the $$$ respectfully submits that the petition and the affidavit is in proper order but if in the opinion of the court if there is any defect the election $$$ is willing to cure the same. it can be seen from the above that the election $$$ clearly mentid about the filing of an affidavit in form which is to be found at page nos. and of the election petition and also mentid at serial no. in the index to the election petition. though not very elegantly pleaded the election $$$ did assert the fact that he had filed affidavits along with the election petition. it can be seen from the above that the election $$$ has also made a submission that if in the opinion of the court if there is any defect the election $$$ is willing to cure the same. such a statement appears to have been made by way of abundant caution in a bid to save the election petition from being dismissed on the ground of non -compliance with the proviso to section in the event of the high court reaching the conclusion that the affidavit filed by the election $$$ along with the election petition is not in fact compliant with the requirement of law. the high court by its order dated.while dismissing or vii rule petition recorded in the instant case the $$$ has not filed the affidavit in the prescribed form in accordance with rule of the conduct of election rules. since aforesaid defect is curable same can be cured by filing affidavit in the prescribed form.the high court further directed the $$$ is directed to file an affidavit in form within days from the date of receipt of certified copy of the order.pursuant to this order admittedly an affidavit was filed by $$$ on.. to understand the controversy in these appeals an analysis of the provisions of the rp act is required. section of the rp act stipulates what is required to be contained in an election petition. section requires every election petition to be verified in the manner laid down in the code of civil procedure. order vi rule of the code deals with the verification of the pleadings. sub -rule stipulates that the person verifying the pleadings shall also furnish an affidavit in support of such pleadings. an election petition challenging the validity of an election can be filed on any of the various grounds specified under section of the rp act. the commission of a corrupt practice either by the returned candidate or his election agent or by any other person with the consent of either the returned candidate or his agent is of the several grounds on which the high court can declare the result of a returned candidate to be void. the election of a returned candidate can also be set aside on the ground of the commission of corrupt practice in the interest of the returned candidate by an agent other than his election agent and by virtue of such corrupt practice the result of the election insofar as it concerns a returned candidate has been materially affected. in either case in view of the stipulation contained in proviso to section rp act the election petition is required to be accompanied by an affidavit in the prescribed form. in exercise of the power under section of the rp act the representation of the people conduct of elections and election petitions rules have been framed by the government of india. rule prescribes as follows rule. form of affidavit to be filed with election petition.--the affidavit referred to in the proviso to sub -section of section shall be sworn before a magistrate of the class or a notary or a commissir of oaths and shall be in form.form also indicates the layout of the affidavit. the requirement of giving such affidavit where there are allegations of commission of corrupt practice in an election petition came to be inserted in the act by virtue of an amendment in the year. the question whether an election petition challenging the election of a returned candidate on the ground of corrupt practice is required to be accompanied either by affidavit or affidavits in view of the insertion of clause of rule of order vi fell for consideration of this court in p.a. $$$ v. m.k. $$$ and ors. $$$ / sc//$$$$$$$ / sc//$$$$ scc and this court held thus:.. we are also unable to accept mr. venugopal 's submission that even in a case where the proviso to section was attracted a single affidavit would be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of both the provisions. subsequently the same question again fell for consideration before a larger bench of this court in g.m. $$$ v. $$$ / $$$ / sc/0/$$$$ scc. the court disapproved the view taken in $$$ case and held:.. the principal question of law raised for our consideration is whether to maintain an election petition it is imperative for $$$$ to file an affidavit in terms of order rule of the code of civil procedure in support of the averments made in the election petition in addition to an affidavit in a case where resort to corrupt practices have been alleged against the returned candidate as required by the proviso to section of the representation of the people act. in our opinion there is no such mandate in the representation of the people act and a reading of p.a. $$$ v. m.k. $$$ which suggests to the contrary does not lay down correct law to this limited extent. in any event as in the present case the same result has been achieved by the election $$$ by filing a composite affidavit both in support of the averments made in the election petition and with regard to the allegations of corrupt practices by the returned candidate. this procedure is not contrary to law and can not be faulted. such a composite affidavit would not only be in substantial compliance with the requirements of the act but would actually be in full compliance thereof. the filing of affidavits is not warranted by the act nor is it necessary especially when a composite affidavit can achieve the desired result. the issue before this court in this batch of appeals is whether the election petition was accompanied by an affidavit which is compliant with the requirement of statute under the proviso to section. for answering the issue it is incidentally necessary to determine whether the election $$$ filed affidavits along with the election petition to satisfy the requirement of the law. unfortunately the high court did not examine when it passed the orders dated.or.the question whether there were affidavits filed by the election $$$ along with the election petition and whether the affidavit said to have been annexed to the election petition at page nos. -is compliant with the requirement of stipulations under proviso to section. at para of the order dated.the high court recorded as follows:. so far as the contention with respect to verification or affidavit is concerned it has been laid down by the apex court g.m. $$$ v. $$$ / $$$ / sc/00/ air sc that absolute compliance of format affidavit is not necessary. substantial compliance with format prescribed is sufficient. in case there is any defect in affidavit or in its verification the same is curable and the same can not be a sufficient ground to dismiss the petition in limine. in the instant case the $$$ has not filed the affidavit in the prescribed form in accordance with rule of the conduct of election rules. since the aforesaid defect is curable same can be cured by filing affidavit in the prescribed form.we are sorry to note that the para commences with a clumsy statement so far as the contention with respect to verification or affidavit and makes an irrelevant reference to the g.m. $$$ case supra and ultimately records a conclusion without any discussion of the pleadings or evidence that $$$ has not filed an affidavit in form-. it was however ordered at para of the order dated.do not find any ground for rejection of the petition in limine under order rule of the code of civil procedure. accordingly i.a. no. filed by the respondent no. is hereby dismissed. the $$$ is directed to file affidavit in form of the conduct of election rules within days from the date of receipt of certified copy of the order. respondent no. is also directed to file written statement within weeks from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.it is a wholly unsatisfactory way of dealing with any issue in a judicial proceeding and more so with election petitions. election petitions deal with the basic rights of the citizenry of this country. election is a politically sacred event and an election dispute is too serious a matter to be dealt with casually. therefore the parliament thought it fit to entrust the adjudication of election disputes to the high courts. it is unfortunate that the learned judge chose to deal with the matter so casually. the result is that a finding that there was no affidavit in the form no. came to be recorded without recording any finding regarding the existence or otherwise of the affidavit which is said to have been annexed in the election petition at page nos. and nor its content. since the interlocutory application was dismissed the election $$$ had neither a reason nor the necessity to challenge the correctness of the findings recorded in the order as the decision is in his favour. aggrieved by the said order the returned candidate filed the review petition seeking review of the said order. the application hinged on the finding recorded in the order dated.that the $$$ has not filed the affidavit in the prescribed form no. it is therefore pleaded in the review petition that the direction of the high court permitting the election $$$ to cure the defect in the affidavit filed along with the election petition is unsustainable and hence the order dated.is to be reviewed. interestingly in the rejoinder dated.filed by the returned candidate to the reply of the election $$$ dated.in the said review petition the returned candidate stated as follows para. that the averments made in the petition were verified by the $$$ as per verification clause submitted an affidavit in support of the petition and filed another affidavit under $$$ at pages and of the election petition and the affidavit dated.pursuant to order of the hon'ble court dated.. it is clear from the abovementid pleading of the returned candidate that he is clearly aware of the fact that there were affidavits filed along with the election petition as averred by the election $$$ in his petition. the said review application was dismissed by order dated.. aggrieved by the same the returned candidate filed slp no. of. it is rather difficult to understand the order dated.. there was an unnecessary examination of various authorities of the supreme court without settling the basic facts and identifying the issues. the high court extracted the content of an affidavit which according to the election $$$ is an affidavit filed in compliance with the requirement of section but not the affidavit in form and records a conclusion at para as follows:. a bare reading of earlier affidavit filed by the $$$ makes it clear that the $$$ had covered all the pleadings in his affidavit and no pleading was left which was not mentid in the affidavit but what was lacking was that the earlier affidavit was not in the prescribed form no. of the rule of the rules of. certainly there was a non -compliance of proviso to section of the act of but section of the act of is not covered under section of the act of.interestingly at para once again the high court recorded a conclusion:. as mentid hereinabove in the instant case substantial compliance of section of the act of has already been d by the $$$ by filing affidavit along with the petition but only defect was that the affidavit was not in prescribed format therefore at the most it was a non -compliance of section of the act of and same is curable..the cryptic conclusions recorded in the order dated.only add to the existing confusion. however aggrieved by the conclusion that the affidavit was not in the prescribed form- the election petitir preferred slp no. of on the ground that such a conclusion came to be recorded on an errous identification of the affidavit. aggrieved by the dismissal of the review petition the returned candidate filed slp no. of. when the appeals were argued before this court on.the election petitir made a submission that separate affidavits were filed along with the election petition and the high court 's observation supra are based on an errous identification of the affidavit. the returned candidate took a stand that there was no. $$$$ affidavit as alleged by the election petitir in compliance with the proviso to section of the rp act filed along with the election petition. in view of the abovementid imprecise findings recorded by the high court without any reference to the pleadings or evidence on record and the contradictory stands taken before this court by the parties this court thought it fit to adjourn the matter in order to enable the parties to seek a clarification regarding the true state of facts whether there was or affidavits filed along with the election petition. pursuant to the said order the election petitir filed i.a. no. seeking clarifications from the madhya pradesh high court. the said i.a. was disposed of by an order dated..the high court recorded;. on the basis of aforesaid discussion the questions posed by the supreme court in order dated --are answered in the following manner question no. whether there was affidavit or affidavits filed along with the election petition?answer affidavits were filed along with election petition.question no. the actual date when those affidavits were filed?answer both affidavits were filed on --the date on which the election petition was filed.question no. whether either of the affidavits is filed in compliance with the requirement of section of the representation of the people act the affidavit at page nos. & of the election petition is filed in compliance with the requirement of proviso appended to section of the representation of people act. i.a. no. stands disposed of accordingly. the said order is the subject matter of challenge in slp no. of filed by the returned candidate. apart from the various grounds on which the correctness of the findings recorded by the high court are challenged the returned candidate took a preliminary objection that the order dated.suffers from lack of jurisdiction and therefore it is required to be set aside on that ground al. according to the returned candidate i.a. no. of ought to have been heard by a division bench because of the stipulation contained in rule of the high court of madhya pradesh rules. the said rule stipulates that any application seeking clarifications of an earlier order of the court passed by a learned judge who retired thereafter ought to be heard by a division bench and justice solanki who passed the order in the or vii rule petition retired subsequently. in response it is submitted on behalf of the election petitir that such an objection was never raised by the returned candidate before the high court when i.a. no. of was being heard and therefore now can not be permitted to raise the same;ii that the adjudication of an election petition is governed by section read with section of the representation of the peoples act. $$$ -compliance if any with the rules of the high court framed under article does not render the order without jurisdiction;iii that i.a. no. of is more about clarification of record not clarification of order in strict sense.in other words the clarification sought is not regarding either the interpretation of the earlier orders or the legal implications of the earlier orders but an enquiry into certain facts and the record of the high court pertaining to the election petition. therefore rule would have no application.that the requirement of a matter being heard by a division bench under rule is limited only to the cases of review clarification or modification of only judgments decrees and final orders but not to the interlocutory orders such as the order of which clarification was sought. we reject the preliminary objection raised by the returned candidate the reason the adjudication of election petitions including the examination of all incidental questions in interlocutory proceedings arising during the course of the adjudication of the election petition is entrusted by section of the representation of people act to the high court within whose jurisdiction the election dispute arises. section stipulates that the jurisdiction shall be exercised ordinarily by a single judge who is to be designated by the chief justice0.though the said section indicates that the chief justice has a discretion to entrust trial of an election petition to a bench consisting of more than judges such a discretion is to be exercised by the chief justice al.the rules of the high court are framed by the high court pursuant to the power vested in it under article. the exercise of such power is subject to the provisions of the constitution and the provisions of any law of the appropriate legislature. rule mandates the listing of certain matters nature of which is described therein before a division bench. such stipulation is contrary to the stipulation of section that election petitions are to be tried by a single judge of the high court leaving a discretion in the chief justice to decide whether in a given case an election petition shall be heard by more than judge. such a statutory discretion vested in the chief justice of the high court can not be curtailed by a rule made as the high court in view of the clear declaration by the constitution in the opening clause of article that any rule shall be subject to the law made by the appropriate legislature.we are therefore of the opinion that the objection raised by the returned candidate is not tenable.in view of the above conclusion we do not wish to examine the other defences of the election petitir in this regard. we now proceed to examine the appeals on their merits. the fate of these appeals would eventually depend upon the answer to the questions whether the election petitir filed affidavits on.at the time of presenting the election petition the of which being the affidavit at page nos. -referred to at serial no. of the index appended to the election petition purportedly in form to satisfy the requirement of law flowing from the proviso to section and if such an affidavit was in fact filed on.as contended by the election petitir whether such an affidavit satisfies the prescription contained in form. by order dated.in ia no. of the high court recorded a finding that the election petitir filed affidavits along with the election petition on.the date on which the election petition was presented to the high court. the high court also recorded a finding that the affidavit at page nos. -of the election petition which finds mention at sr. no. in the index is in compliance with the requirement of proviso appended to section of the representation of people act. if the abovementid findings are legally tenable appeals arising out of slp nos. of of and of filed by the returned candidate are to be dismissed and the appeal arising out of slp no. of filed by the election petitir would have to be allowed. therefore we proceed to examine the correctness of the abovementid findings recorded by the high court. the correctness of the said findings is contested by the returned candidate on the following grounds i. that at the earliest point of time the high court in its order dated.recorded a finding that the election petitir did not file the affidavit in the prescribed form. therefore the finding to the contra in the order of the high court dated.is unsustainable.ii. in the order dated.after recording a finding that the election petitir did not file an affidavit in form the high court recorded a further finding that such a defect is curable and therefore directed the election petitir to cure the defect by filing a fresh affidavit in form. the election petitir without challenging the correctness of the finding that he failed to file an affidavit in form along with the election petition chose to comply with the consequential direction of filing afresh affidavit. therefore the election petitir is precluded from contending at a later stage that the finding recorded by the high court in its order dated.is incorrect. rule of the rules relating to election petitions in the madhya pradesh high court requires the additional registrar or deputy registrar shall affix his full signature to every page of the petition and the affidavit accompanying it.and the affidavit at page nos. and of the election petition does not contain the seal and signature of the registrar of the high court. whereas all the other pages of the election petition contain the seal and signature of the registrar. the absence of the seal and the signature of the registrar only on the affidavit at page nos. -must necessarily lead to an inference that such an affidavit must have been inserted in the election petition sometime subsequent to the date of the presentation of the election petition. such an inference would be further strengthened by the fact that in the index of the election petition reference to the affidavit at page nos. -is made at entry no. in the index. the said entry is an addition made in handwriting in an otherwise completely typewritten index.hence there is non -compliance with the requirement of the mandate contained in proviso to section warranting the dismissal of the election petition in limine. the election petitir 's response to the above submissions of the returned candidate is:(i the high court did not record any finding in its order dated.regarding the existence or otherwise of the affidavit at page nos. -or the content of the said affidavit in spite of the specific plea of the election petitir. the high court only recorded a vague finding that the election petitir has not filed the affidavit in the prescribed form in accordance with rule of the conduct of election rules. it is not clear from the said order as to which of the affidavits was in the mind of the high court when it recorded such a conclusion. the high court should have recorded a categoric finding in that regard in view of the specific pleading in the reply of the election $$$ that the election $$$ had in fact filed a separate affidavit to be found at page nos. -to satisfy the requirement of law under the proviso to section. in the absence of any such categoric finding it can not be said that the findings recorded by the high court in its order dated.are inconsistent with the earlier finding recorded in the order dated..that there was no occasion for the election $$$ to challenge the said finding as the ultimate result of the order was in his favour. it is also submitted that though the election $$$ did not challenge the finding recorded by the high court in its order dated.the election $$$ is entitled to dispute the correctness of the finding as and when such a finding is sought to be pressed into service against him.coming to the question of filing a fresh affidavit in obedience of the consequential direction of the high court the election $$$ submitted that such a course of action was pursued by him by way of abundant caution.it is submitted by the election $$$ with regard to the absence of the signature of the registrar on the affidavit at page nos. -that though it is the duty of the registrar of the high court to sign on each page of the election petition and the affidavit filed alongwith the election petition if the registrar failed in his duty the election $$$ can not be penalized by drawing an inference that the affidavit was not presented along with the election petition. in this regard the election $$$ relied upon the well -settled principle of law that the act which includes an omission of the court shall not prejudice the rights of any party. we reject submissions of the returned candidate for the following reasons:(i the submission of the returned candidate that the subsequent and conflicting finding is not legally tenable if at all is based on any legal principle it is based either on the doctrine of res judicata or some principle analogous to it based on public policy that there must be finality to the judicial orders. even if the principle of res judicata is invoked we only presume without examining the applicability of the same what is barred under section of code of civil procedure is the adjudication of an issue which was directly and substantially in issue in a former suit between the same parties and has been heard and finally decided.the question whether affidavits were filed along with the election petition though was not directly in issue as the returned candidate never filed a rejoinder to the reply of the election $$$ wherein it was stated that he had filed affidavits alongwith the election petition. in deciding the or vii rule petition the high court never examined the question it is an issue of fact whether there were affidavits as pleaded by the election $$$ in his reply to the said petition. we have already recorded that the order in or vii rule petition is too casual. it does not take note of either the facts in issue or identify the point to be decided. any finding of fact recorded in such circumstances is required to be set aside if appealed against by the aggrieved party if such an order is an appealable order. since the learned judge dismissed the or vii rule petition though the finding is adverse to the election $$$ he need not have filed an appeal.therefore we do not see any legal principle on the basis of which the returned candidate can successfully contend that in view of the finding recorded in the order dated.the high court could not have recorded a finding in ia no. of that affidavits were filed along with the election petition.vi we now deal with the submission of the returned candidate regarding the absence of the seal and signature of the registrar of the high court on the affidavit at page nos. -.the high court in its order dated.in i.a. no. of recorded a .. however the registrar in compliance with sub -rule of rule has affixed his seal and signatures at every page of the election petition and the affidavit at page no. and. however no such seal or signature of the registrar is to be found upon the affidavit at page nos. &..further at para of the order it is recorded:. in this regard it has to be kept in mind that all official acts are presumed to be properly d. it is true that affidavit at page nos. & does not bear the seal or signatures of the registrar however it appears that it was not sealed and signed by the registrar because it was annexed almost at the end of the petition. since as per rules documents annexed to an election petition are not required to be signed and sealed by the registrar n of the documents filed along with the petition from serial no. to serial no. bears his seal and signatures. probably nobody pointed out to the registrar that there is another affidavit at page no. therefore it was not sealed and signed like other documents.at the outset it may be mentid that there is a typographical error in the abovementid order. the relevant rule of the high court dealing with the matter is rule but not. rule reads as follows chapter viirules relating to election petitionsrule every election petition complete in all respects shall be presented during to the additional registrar or deputy $$$ at jabalpur.the name of the person presenting an election petition with a description of the capacity in which he is presenting it of presentation and any other particulars considered necessary shall be endorsed in the margin of page of the petition by the additional registrar or deputy registrar under his own signature.the additional registrar or deputy registrar shall have the petition examined in order to find out that all the requirements of the representation of the people act and these rules have been complied with.the additional registrar or deputy registrar shall affix his full signature to every page of the petition and the affidavit accompanying it.the additional registrar or deputy registrar after examining the petition shall record his opinion on the opening order -sheet in the following presented on.... by.... properly drawn up apparently within time and properly stamped.it can be seen from sub -rule that the concerned registrar shall affix his full signature to every page of the petition and the affidavit accompanying it.the failure of the registrar to comply with the requirement of sub -rule is sought to be explained by the high court by saying that such a lapse occurred probably because nobody pointed out to the registrar regarding the existence of affidavit at page nos. -. we are of the opinion that such a conclusion is not tenable. rule casts a mandatory duty on the registrar to sign on each page of the election petition and also the affidavit filed along with the election petition. such a mandatory duty must be performed irrespective of the fact whether somebody points out to the registrar or not regarding the existence of the affidavit.if the existence of $$$$ affidavit at page nos. -of the election $$$ is not in dispute but the question is whether the non -compliance of the rule by the registrar is fatal to the election petition perhaps the answer would be that it is not. because it is the settled proposition of law that the act or omission of the court shall not harm any party.but when the question is whether such an affidavit was filed along with the election petition on.different considerations arise. the question whether the election $$$ filed $$$$ affidavit is a pure question of fact. the burden of proving such a fact in law is on the election $$$ if such a question is really in issue. because if he failed the allegations of the commission of corrupt practices by the returned candidate can not be adjudicated in the absence of an affidavit in form. however such a question was never in issue in or vii rule petition. as already noticed at para supra at the earliest point during the course of the proceedings of the election petition when the question arose whether an affidavit in form was filed or not the election $$$ clearly took a stand that there was an affidavit at page nos. and. according to him the said affidavit is in form contemplated in proviso to section. the returned candidate never disputed the statement of the election $$$ by filing a rejoinder to the above -mentid stand taken in the election $$$ 's reply dated.in the or vii rule petition. the returned candidate admits that at least by.-the date on which he received summons a copy of the election petition along with annexures including the affidavit at page nos. -of the election petition was available on record. but his case now is that such an affidavit was not filed along with the election petition within the period of limitation but must have been inserted in the election petition sometime in the interregnum period between.the date on which the period of limitation for filing the election petition expired and.. but the objection of the returned candidate in or vii rule petition was only that the affidavit sworn and filed along with the petition by the $$$ is not in conformity with form of the conduct rules.from the language of or vii rule petition it is clear that the returned candidate 's objection is only regarding the format and content of the affidavit but not regarding the date of the filing of the affidavit on the other hand the employment of the expression along with clearly indicates that the returned candidate also at that point of time accepted that the affidavit at page nos. -was presented on the same date i... therefore the question of proof of the fact which was never in issue does not arise much less the question of burden of proof. the fact that the election $$$ chose to file yet another affidavit pursuant to the order dated.is another circumstance sought to be relied upon by the returned candidate in support of his submission that there was no affidavit filed along with the election petition. we are of the opinion that in the circumstances of the case the inference such as the suggested by the returned candidate can not be drawn because the election $$$ in his reply to the or vii rule petition specifically stating that he had filed an affidavit in form along with the election petition took a stand by way of abundant caution that if the court comes to a conclusion that his affidavit is found to be defective for any reason he is willing to file further affidavit to cure the defect. unfortunately the high court took a shortcut without examining the question whether the affidavit at page nos. -satisfies the requirement of form and without recording a definite finding in that regard simply recorded a conclusion that the defect is curable and the same can be cured by filing an affidavit in the form. mr. p.p. rao learned senior counsel submitted that the election $$$ having availed the benefit of the order in or vii rule petition by filing another affidavit can not now question the correctness of the finding that he did not file an affidavit which is compliance with proviso to section. in support of the said submission mr. p.p. rao relied on judgments i. state of punjab and ors. v. $$$ $$$ / sc/0/$$$$$$$ / sc/0/$$$$ scc and $$$ bose and $$$. v. $$$ and anr. $$$ / wb/00/$$$ / wb/00/ air cal.. in our opinion the principle laid down in the said judgments is of no relevance to the controversy on hand. the dispute on hand is regarding the existence of a fact which was never in issue in or vii rule petition. the returned candidate can not shift his case from stage to stage. he can not now be permitted to raise such a question of fact in the absence of an appropriate pleading and contend that the election $$$ is precluded from arguing that he had filed $$$$ affidavit along with the election petition by pressing into service a rule of estoppel. in view of the foregoing discussion civil appeal arising out of slp civil no. of being without any merits is dismissed. as a consequence civil appeals arising out of slp civil nos. of and of are also required to be dismissed and they are accordingly dismissed. coming to the civil appeal arising out of slp civil no. of the same is required to be allowed in view of the findings recorded by the high court in i.a. no. of which has become final by virtue of dismissal of civil appeal arising out of slp civil no. of. the same is accordingly allowed. in the facts and circumstances of the case there will be no order as to costs.admittedly the returned candidate could not be served with the summons in the normal course by the high court. he appeared in the high court admittedly pursuant to the substituted service paper publication. the returned candidate has an explanation for the same. the truth of the explanation is not in issue.of reply to the ia no. of.. since the $$$ has also filed affidavit in support of the election petition and has also filed an affidavit in the prescribed format therefore there is no defect in this regard.."section. contents of petition.an election shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the $$$ relies;(b shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that the $$$ alleges including as full a statement as possible of the names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt practice and the date and place of the commission of each such practice and(c shall be signed by the $$$ and verified in the manner laid down in the code of civil procedure of for the verification of pleadings;provided that where the $$$ alleges any corrupt practice the petition shall also be accompanied by an affidavit in the prescribed form in support of the allegation of such corrupt practice and the particulars thereof.any schedule or annexure to the petition shall also be signed by the $$$ and verified in the same manner as the petition.vi rule. verification of pleadings.save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force every pleading shall be verified at the foot by the party or by of the parties pleading or by some other person proved to the satisfaction of the court to be acquainted with the facts of the case.the person verifying shall specify by reference to the numbered paragraphs of the pleading what he verifies of his own knowledge and what he verifies upon information received and believed to be true.the verification shall be signed by the person making it and shall state the date on which and the place at which it was signed.the person verifying the pleading shall also furnish an affidavit in support of his pleadings.-rule came to be inserted to the code by act of matters were argued at some length before us. $$$ appearing for the returned candidate has proceeded on the basis that there is no affidavit at all as required under section of the act whereas it is pointed out by learned counsel on behalf of election petitir that as a matter of fact separate affidavits were filed along with the election petition. the being an affidavit in compliance of requirement of the provisions under order vi rule of code of civil procedure and the an affidavit in compliance with requirement of section of the act. $$$ copies of both the affidavits are available on record here.the question whether there was affidavit or affidavits filed along with the election petition as mentid above the actual date when those affidavits were filed whether either of the affidavits is filed in compliance with the requirement of section of the act or not are matters for examination of the high court. the high court is required to record definite findings in the event there is any dispute with respect to the questions mentid above. unfortunately the orders of the high court are cryptic and the findings recorded by the high court extracted earlier in this order are not clear with regard to the above mentid questions.7challenging the correctness of the said order slp is filed by the returned candidate.ground no. of slp c no. of the impugned order has been passed in violation of the provisions of chapter iv rule of the madhya pradesh high court rules if yes whether the impugned order is liable to be set aside on the ground al?"the relevant portion of rule reads as follows:". save as provided in sub -rule an application for review clarification or modification of a judgment decree or final order passed by a judge or judges shall be heard by the same judge or judges provided that such application filed in respect of an interlocutory order in a pending case shall be posted before the regular bench.an application for review clarification or modification of a judgment decree or final order passed by a judge or judges who or or more of whom is or are temporarily unavailable and in the opinion of the chief justice the application looking to the urgency of the matter can not wait for such judge or judges to resume work permanently unavailable shall be heard( if the decree or order review of which is applied for was passed by a judge sitting al by the regular division bench.-such jurisdiction shall be exercised ordinarily by a single judge of the high court and the chief justice shall from time to time assign or more judges for that purpose.provided that where the high court consists only of judge he shall try all election petitions presented to that court. jurisdiction of existing high courts.--subject to the provisions of this constitution and to the provisions of any law of the appropriate legislature made by virtue of powers conferred on that legislature by this constitution the jurisdiction of and the law administered in any existing high court and the respective powers of the judges thereof in relation to the administration of justice in the court including any power to make rules of court and to regulate the sittings of the court and of members thereof sitting alone or in division courts shall be the same as immediately before the commencement of this constitution provided that any restriction to which the exercise of original jurisdiction by any of the high courts with respect to any matter concerning the revenue or concerning any act ordered or done in the collection thereof was subject immediately before the commencement of this constitution shall no longer apply to the exercise of such jurisdiction.content of reply of the election petitioner in this regard is also extracted at para supra.singh v. $$$ / sc/0008/$$$$manu / sc/0008/$$$$ scc para at page. after the amendment of order rule the insertion made in sub -rule makes it permissible to file a cross -objection against a finding. the difference is basically that a respondent may defend himself without taking recourse to file a cross -objection to the extent the decree stands in his favour but if he intends to assail any part of the decree it is obligatory on his part to file the cross -objection. in banarsi v. $$$ / sc/047/$$$$manu / sc/047/$$$$ scc it has been observed that the amendment inserted in is clarificatory and situations have been adverted to therein. category deals with the impugned decree which is partly in favour of the appellant and partly in favour of the respondent. dealing with such a situation the bench observed that in such a case it is necessary for the respondent to file an appeal or take cross -objection against that part of the decree which is against him if he seeks to get rid of the same though he is entitled to support that part of the decree which is in his favour without taking any cross -objection. in respect of other categories which deal with a decree entirely in favour of the respondent though an issue had been decided against him or a decree entirely in favour of the respondent where all the issues had been answered in his favour but there is a finding in the judgment which goes against him in the pre -amendment stage he could not take any cross -objection as he was not a person aggrieved by the decree. but post -amendment read in the light of the explanation to sub -rule though it is still not necessary for the respondent to take any cross -objection laying challenge to any finding adverse to him as the decree is entirely in his favour yet he may support the decree without cross -objection. it gives him the right to take cross -objection to a finding recorded against him either while answering an issue or while dealing with an issue. it is apt to note that after the amendment in the code if the appeal stands withdrawn or dismissed for default the cross -objection taken to a finding by the respondent would still be adjudicated upon on merits which remedy was not available to the respondent under the unamended code.