$$$ j.c.a. nos. -. these appeals arise from a suit filed by respondent in the court of subordinate judge at ootacamund state of tamilnadu on th october. the parties to the suit are closely related. respondent taraben is the widow of $$$ while $$$ original defendant no. was the widow of $$$ real brother of $$$. santokben died during the pendency of the litigation. her sons who were defendants no. $$$ no. $$$ and no. rajnikant in the suit were appellants in these appeals. $$$ and her son $$$ died during pendency of the appeals. necessary steps regarding substitution have been taken. $$$. m / s. bengorm nilgiri plantations co. is a partnership firm. the family owned a tea estate in the neelgiris area. it was known as bengorm tea estate. it was a co -ownership property of the members of the family. a partnership firm was constituted under the name and style of bengorm tea plantations to manage the tea estate. the partnership did not have any proprietary interest in the estate. the shares of the parties in the tea estate as well as in the partnership firm are not in dispute. $$$ died on $$$$. he left behind a will. taraben respondent no. claiming to be sole executor of the estate of her husband $$$ filed the present suit claiming the following reliefs:"(a decree for partitions by metes and bounds of the plaintiff 's % share in bengorm estate mentid in schedule to the plaint and separate possession thereof against defendants to and/or in severally.a decree for accounts against the defendants for the % share of $$$ deceased in the defendant no. in respect of profits and monies to his credits and in the assets of the firm including stocks in trade stores and spares standing crops investments provisions reserves and goodwill as mentid in paragraph of the plaint and decree for the amount found to be due to the plaintiff as ascertained in this suit on enquiry with interest at % per annum from $$$$.decree for accounts for mesne profits and/or illegal gains from $$$$ till payment as mentid in paragraph of the plaint and decree for the amount found to be due to the plaintiff as ascertained in this suit on enquiry with interest at % per annum from the date herein. a preliminary decree was passed by the trial court on th april granting a decree in favour of the plaintiff respondent herein for accounts against defendants for the % share of $$$ in the partnership firm with interest thereon at the rate of % per annum from $$$$ till realisation. the suit with respect to other reliefs was dismissed. the plaintiff appealed against the said preliminary decree with regard to relief denied to her by the trial court. during the pendency of the appeal before the high court on st november the plaintiff appellant before the high court applied for amendment of the plaint. an amendment was sought with respect to the rate of interest as mentid in paragraphs and of the plaint. the plaintiff had originally claimed interest at the rate of % per annum in both these paras of the plaint. by amendment the rate of interest was sought to be revised from % per annum to % per annum. the high court disposed of the amendment application simultaneously with the appeal against the preliminary decree vide judgment and orders dated th $$$$. the only amendment allowed was with respect to rate of interest in para of the plaint. the plaintiff was allowed to amend the said prayer so as to raise the claim with respect to rate of interest from % per annum to % per annum. similar amendment sought in para of the plaint was specifically rejected. so far as appeal against preliminary decree passed by the trial court is concerned the division bench of the madras high court allowed the same thereby the prayer of the plaintiff with respect to % share in the bengorm tea estate and mesne profits after the death of $$$ on $$$$ alongwith interest on the amount found due by way of mesne profits was allowed. the preliminary decree passed by the trial court on th april with respect to prayer contained in para of the plaint became final. on the question of interest with respect to para of the plaint even though the high court had allowed the amendment to enable the plaintiff to claim interest at the rate of % per annum the high court took note of amendment of section c.p.c. in the meanwhile and treating the suit claim as a commercial transaction allowed interest at the rate of interest as charged by nationalised banks during $$$$ from time to time on commercial loans. the trial court passed a final decree on th january and determined a sum of rs.paise as due by way of mesne profits. it awarded simple interest thereon at the rate of % per annum till realization. it also passed a decree for rs.paise in pursuance of prayer in para of the plaint with simple interest at the rate of % per annum w.f. th $$$$ till realisation. the appellants appealed against the said final decree before the madras high court. during the pendency of the appeals with the agreement of counsel for the parties the high court appointed a commission to determine the amount of mesne profits payable to the plaintiff in the suit. the commission filed its report on nd september determining a sum of rs.in the behalf. ultimately by its impugned judgment dated rd september the high court dismissed the appeals filed by the present appellants against the final decree of the trial court. it modified the decree of the trial court and passed a final decree in the following terms:"the respondents / defendants do pay the petitir plaintiff the sum of rs. by way of mesne profits and interest due for the period from.to.with simple interest at the rate of per cent per annum of rs. from.till date of realisation and defendants do also pay the plaintiff the sum of rs. ,,.by way of her share of good -will standing crops and missing items with simple interest at the same rate of per cent per annum on this sum from.till date of realization and the proportionate cost. the petitir / plaintiff should pay the court fee at the time of execution. on the question of interest the high court has in para of the impugned judgment noted that it was wrong on the part of the high court while passing the preliminary decree vide judgment dated $$$$ to award interest as per the rate of interest charged by nationalised banks on commercial transactions from time to time. it was also felt that the high court ought not to have proceeded on the basis of amended section of the code of civil procedure. yet the high court did not interfere with award of interest only for the reason that the special leave petition against the preliminary decree had been dismissed by this court. the appellants who were defendants in the suit have filed the present appeals against the judgment dated rd september of the high court. during the hearing the learned counsel for appellants raised points for decision of this court in these appeals i. determination of quantum of mesne profits payable to the respondent -plaintiff by the appellants;ii. rate of interest to be awarded on the decretal amount;iii. adjustment of admitted liability of $$$ towards the partnership firm in the sum of rs.paise.point no. so far as the question of determination of quantum of mesne profit is concerned the liability to pay is not being disputed. the only dispute is with respect to the determination of amount payable by way of mesne profits. as pointed out earlier the division bench of the high court had appointed a commission headed by a retired judge of the madras high court and assisted by $$$ nominated by each party to carry out the exercise regarding determination of mesne profits. the commission filed its report in the high court. the high court arrived at a finding regarding quantum of mesne profits after looking into the accounts the report of commission and other relevant facts and material. we have no reason to differ with the view of the high court on this aspect. we are not required to reappreciate the material. as a matter of fact during the course of hearing counsel for the appellant indicated willingness to go by the commissir 's report in this behalf. therefore we accept the finding of the high court on this issue. total amount by way of mesne profits as per the impugned judgment of the high court comes to rs. this figure does not include interest. interest is leviable on the amount of mesne profits. the high court has in its impugned judgment awarded interest w. $$$$ till $$$$ on periodical basis at varying rate of interest. periods have been fixed based on change in bank rate of interest. the rate of interest varies between % p.a. to % p.a. the award of interest by the high court is based on its earlier order dated $$$$ regarding levy of interest as per prevailing bank rate of interest on commercial transactions from time to time. this part of the judgment of the high court in our view is not correct. the rate at which is to be awarded is being separately considered under point no. that decision will govern the award of interest on mesne profits. a mistake has been committed by the high court in calculation of interest on mesne profits. interest has to be calculated on $$$$ basis because the amount of mesne profits on which interest is to be awarded has to be arrived at on $$$$ basis. $$$ profits for $$$$ would be from $$$$ to $$$$ for $$$$ it will be from $$$$ to $$$$ and so on. it keeps adding on $$$$. the total amount of mesne profits found due by the high court on the basis of commissir 's report comes to rs. this amount is the total of mesne profits calculated on $$$$ basis. interest can not be allowed on the whole amount from the beginning. interest had to be worked out on amounts falling due towards mesne profits on $$$$ basis i. on the amount of mesne profits which could be taken to be due to the plaintiff at the end of $$$$.point no. the question of rate of interest has been the subject matter of serious controversy between the parties. the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that in the plaint filed on th april interest claimed in para and was at the rate of % per annum. he has further drawn our attention to section of the code of civil procedure as it stood at the time of institution of the suit. it permitted interest being awarded maximum at the rate of % per annum from the date of decree till realisation of the decretal amount. the said section is reproduced $$$ where and in so far as a decree is for the payment of my the court may in the decree order interest at such rate as the court deems reasonable to be paid on the principal sum adjudged from the date of the suit to the date of the decree in addition to any interest adjudged on such principal sum for any period prior to the institution of the suit with further interest at such rate not exceeding per cent per annum as the court deems reasonable on such principal sum from the date of the decree to the date of payment or to such earlier date as the court thinks fit.where such a decree is silent with respect to the payment of further interest on such principal sum from the date of the decree to the date of payment or other earlier date the court shall be deemed to have refused such interest and a separate suit therefore shall not lie. our attention was invited to para of the plaint in which decree for accounts of the partnership firm to the extent of % share of $$$ is sought alongwith interest at the rate of % per annum from $$$$. the trial court passed a preliminary decree on th april as per which only para of the plaint was decreed i. % share of $$$ in the partnership firm with interest at the rate of % per annum from $$$$ till realisation. this part of the preliminary decree was never challenged by any party. rest of the prayers in the plaint were rejected in the preliminary decree. the plaintiff appealed against the preliminary decree only to the extent it rejected other prayers in the plaint. there was no challenge to the award of interest at the rate of % per annum as claimed in para of the plaint. thus according to the learned counsel this part of the preliminary decree became final and so far as the decree for accounts is concerned the plaintiff is entitled to interest only at the rate of % per annum. paras and of the plaint relate to award of mesne profits and interest thereon on the share of $$$ as a co -owner in the bengorm tea estate. the high court accepted the appeal filed by the plaintiff against the preliminary decree. a decree for partition of the bengorm estate to the extent of - share of the plaintiff and for mesne profits on that - share after the death of $$$ till separation of the - share was passed on $$$$. the high court awarded interest on the amount of mesne profits as per rate of interest charged by the nationalised banks during $$$$ from time to time on commercial loans in view of amended section of the code of civil procedure. the learned counsel for the appellant challenged this part of the judgment of the high court on various grounds particularly:(a in the original plaint interest had been claimed only at the rate of % per annum;(b amendment of the plaint was applied for in and was allowed on $$$$ which enabled the plaintiff to amend para of the plaint to claim interest at the rate of % per annum instead of % per annum as originally pleaded. this means that the question of interest being charged at the rates prevailing with nationalised banks from time to time on commercial transactions could never arise. the decree could not go beyond prayer of the plaintiff.the share of the plaintiff in bengorm estate with respect of which mesne profits were awarded and on which interest was being sought could not be said to be a commercial transaction so as to attract rate of interest charged by nationalised banks from time to time on commercial transactions;(d in view of sections and of the code of civil procedure amendment act the present suit having been instituted prior to amendment of the c.p.c.interest could be awarded as per provisions of unamended section only. unamended section permitted interest maximum at the rate of % per annum from the date of decree till realisation. clause e of sub -section of section of the amending act of is reproduced as $$$ the provisions of section of the principal act as amended by section of this act shall not affect the rate at which interest may be allowed on a decree in any suit instituted before the commencement of the said section and interest on a decree passed in such suit shall be ordered in accordance with the provisions of section as they stood before the commencement of the said section as if the said section had not come into force;"(e amendment of plaint once allowed relates back to the date of original plaint. therefore in view of the specific bar contained in section referred to above such an amendment was clearly illegal;(f the court had only permitted amendment of the plaint which does not mean that the plea contained by way of amendment is accepted by the court. the defendants had to be given a chance to contest the plea without which the amended claim with respect to rate of interest could not be enforced. it may be noted at this stage that on applications moved by the plaintiff in this behalf - share of the plaintiff in the estate known as bengorn tea estate was delivered to the plaintiff by the defendants on march and there is no dispute about this fact. the grounds raised on behalf of appellants can now be conveniently dealt with.  we deal with the question of amendment of para of the plaint allowed by the high court in an application moved for that purpose. is a procedural aspect while the other is a legal aspect. procedural aspect demands that on amendment of being allowed the opposite party has to be given a chance to respond to the amended pleading and if the plea is contested the court has to give its decision thereon. not affording an opportunity to the contesting party to contest a plea which has been allowed to be amended is negation of justice. in the present case the fact remains that amendment application of the plaintiff was allowed vide order dated th december when on the same date the appeal against the preliminary decree was disposed of and rate of interest going even beyond what was permitted by way of amendment was awarded. the decree which was passed was for much more than the amendment allowed. the plaintiff had only sought leave to amend the rate of interest as originally pleaded as % per annum to % per annum. this amendment was allowed. but in the decree the court allowed interest to be charged at the prevailing bank rate of interest charged by nationalised banks from time to time on commercial transactions during the relevant period. thus the high court while allowing the prayer for amendment simultaneously passed a decree not only based on the amendment plea but for exceeding it. no amended pleadings were filed. no opportunity was given to defendants to contest the plea. a bare reading of order vi rule of code of civil procedure shows that amendment is of a plea contained in the pleadings and the object of allowing amendment of pleadings is to determine the real questions in controversy between the parties. this means the parties have to be given a chance to contest the questions in controversy and the court has to give its decision ultimately on such contested issues. this procedure was not followed in the present case. the procedure followed is wholly illegal. this court had occasion to pronounce on this issue in j. jermons v. $$$ and ors. $$$ / sc/0/99$$$ / sc/0/99 air99sc0. it was held that a new plea can not be allowed to be raised without effecting amendment of pleadings without giving reasonable opportunity to the opposite party to file further pleadings and adduce evidence. thus the decision of the high court in allowing interest on mesne profits at rate of interest charged by nationalised banks from time to time on commercial transactions is wholly illegal and unsustainable. as noted earlier even the high court while passing the final decree felt that in its earlier order dated th december it should not have proceeded on the basis of amended section of the code of civil procedure while awarding interest at the rate charged by nationalised bank on commercial transactions from time to time. the impugned award of interest is thus wholly unwarranted and illegal and has to be set aside. coming to the legal aspect of the amendment of plaint allowed in the present case by the high court it is to be noted that section of the code of civil procedure deals with the question of award of interest. section c.p.c. as it stood before amendment in february deals with the question of interest in stages. first is interest prior to the date of institution of suit stage is interest from the date of institution of suit till date of decree and the state is from the date of decree till realisation of the decretal amount. about the stage section does not say anything while about the stage it says that the interest to be awarded should be as considered reasonable by the court. about the stage i. from the date of decree till realisation the power of the court to award interest is circumscribed i. it can not be more than % per annum. an amendment of plaint relates back to the date of institution of the suit. section of the civil procedure code amendment act provides that in suits instituted before enforcement of the amended provision interest has to be awarded as per the unamended section c.p.c. in the present suit which was instituted much before amendment of section of the civil procedure code therefore interest had to be allowed as per the unamended section c.p.c. which means that from the date of decree till realisation interest could not be more awarded than % per annum. for the period prior to passing of the decree it is left to the court to consider what would be the reasonable rate of interest. while considering a reasonable rate of interest to be awarded for the pre decree period we have to note that in the present case mesne profits are being awarded on account of retention of share of a co -owner in a property by the other co -owners. this can not be said to be a commercial transaction. moreover plaintiff herself claimed interest in the plaint originally instituted at the rate of % per annum. by way of amendment of the plaint she wanted to take advantage of the amended provisions in the code of civil procedure so as to claim interest at a higher rate which in law she was not entitled to. therefore we consider award of interest at the rate of % per annum on the amount found due on account of mesne profits to be calculated on an $$$$ basis as indicated earlier would be fair and reasonable in the facts and circumstances of the case. we may now note the submission on behalf of the respondent in reply to the arguments of the appellants on the question of award of interest. the learned counsel for respondent only banked upon the fact that a special leave petition against the preliminary decree dated th december had been dismissed by this court on an earlier occasion and according to the learned counsel the consequence of that dismissal would be that the decision on the question of award of interest contained in the preliminary decree dated th december had the seal of approval of this court and therefore it need not be interfered with at this stage. the learned counsel further argued that assuming that award of interest by the high court as per the preliminary decree dated th december was errous it was not such an error as may render the decree a nullity. according to him the court had earlier declined to interfere with these findings therefore at this stage this court should not go into this. the learned counsel for respondent tried to draw our attention to the limitations in exercise of jurisdiction by this court under article of the constitution of india. in our view the argument advanced by the learned counsel for the respondent has no substance. the scope of powers of this court under article of the constitution of india was elaborately considered in a recent decision of this court in kunhayammed and ors. v. state of kerala and anr. $$$ / sc/0/00$$$ sc/0/00. the following observations are worth nothing:"the supreme court can not and does not reverse or modify the decree or order appealed against while deciding the petition for special leave to appeal. what is impugned before the supreme court can be reversed or modified only after granting leave to appeal and then assuming appellate jurisdiction over it. if the order impugned before the supreme court can not be reversed or modified at the slp stage obviously that order can not also be affirmed at the slp stage. it follows that disposal of slp against a judgment of the high court does not mean that the said judgment is affirmed by such dismissal. the order on special leacial petition is also never res judicata. in the present case we are at a stage where we are hearing appeals i. leave to appeal has already been granted and these are full fledged appeals against the judgment of the high court before us. therefore we are entitled to go into the question of legality and correctness of the impugned judgment. we have demonstrated the clear illegality committed by the high court in awarding interest on the decree for mesne profits at a rate much higher than what was claimed sic what is admissible in the present case. similar is the illegality regarding award of interest at the rate of % per annum on decree for accounts as per para of the plaint. the decree to that extent is a nullity and can not be allowed to be enforced. our attention has been drawn to several judgments of this court which support the view that an illegal decree is a nullity and can be ignored. these are anil r. deshmukh v. $$$ n. wagh and ors. $$$ / sc/00/999$$$ / sc/00/999 smt. $$$ v. lala ramnarayan and ors. $$$ / sc/0/9$$$ / sc/0/9 and srimathi kaushalya devi and ors. v. $$$.l. bansal $$$ / sc/00/9$$$ / sc/00/9. the result is that the appellant succeeds on point no. i. with regard to award of interest on the decree passed by the court with respect to prayers contained in para and para of the plaint. the appellant will be liable to pay interest under both the heads at the rate of % per annum. in the case of decree for mesne profits i. prayer as per para of the plaint the interest has to be calculated on $$$$ basis as indicated already at the rate of % per annum and on the lump sum amount of rs. at the same rate from.till realisation. similarly on the decree for accounts as per prayer contained in para of the plaint the respondent no. will be entitled to interest at the rate of % per annum on the sum of rs. ,,.from may till realisation.point no. the learned counsel for the appellant vehemently argued that the admitted liability of $$$ towards the partnership in suit to the extent of rs.paise has to be adjusted against his share of the amount falling due to the plaintiff on accounts being taken. the high court accepted the finding of the trial court that this amount stood already adjusted. the learned counsel for the appellant challenged this finding and tried to demonstrate that the adjustment had not been made so far. the learned counsel for appellant also argued that the respondent -plaintiff was not entitled to any share in the goodwill of the partnership firm because the firm had no goodwill. the firm was only managing the affairs of the tea estate and the question of goodwill did not arise. the tea produced by the tea estate does not have a name or a brand name. it has no registered trade marks. the entire produce is auctid as tea and not as any particular brand or type of tea. therefore it could not be said that the firm had any goodwill and the award of share of goodwill to the plaintiff was uncalled for. in our view these are matters of accounts which high court has examined. the high court arrived at certain findings on the basis of record and after considering the report of the commission appointed by it to go into accounts. the commission consisted of a retired high court judge and chartered accountant of each party. therefore we would not like to interfere with the findings arrived at by the high court on these matters. in the result the appeals are allowed to the extent indicated above. the decree for accounts passed by the high court under para of the plaint will stand modified with respect to the rate of interest. the high court has awarded interest at the rate of % per annum on the decretal amount of rs. ,,.paise w.f.  may till realisation. in view of our decision interest will be payable on the said decretal amount at the rate of % per annum instead of % per annum. the decree on account of mesne profit as per para of the plaint stand modified with respect to the rate of interest and the method of calculation of interest. interest is to be calculated on the amount of mesne profits arrived at on $$$$ basis at the rate of % per annum for the entire period. on the final figure rs. interest is payable at the same rate i. % per annum from $$$$ till realisation. the appeals are disposed of accordingly. there will be no order as to costs. the plaintiff will pay court fee on the decretal amount in accordance with law.c.a. nos. -. these appeals stand disposed of in terms of the above judgment.c.a.nos. -. these are cross appeals filed by the plaintiff in the suit against the judgment and decree dated rd september passed by the madras high court. the respondent 's appeals against the said judgment are civil appeals no. -. all the appeals including the present appeals were heard together and are being disposed of in terms of the judgment in c.a.nos. -. in civil appeals no. -the appellant was plaintiff in the suit. questions have been raised. pertains to reimbursement regarding payment of gratuity alleged to have been made by the plaintiff to the workers who came to her share along with the share in the bengorm tea estate which she received in terms of the decree passed by the court below. the issue sought to be raised by the appellant is with respect to the award to interest under the decree in her favour by the courts below. so far as the question of reimbursement of the appellant regarding amount of gratuity paid by her to the workers who came to her share along with share in the bengorm tea estate allotted to her in terms of the decree the claim is totally untenable in our view. the learned counsel for the defendants submitted that in fact the defendants never wanted to transfer any of the workers to the plaintiff. it was at the insistence of the plaintiff that some of the workers were transferred to her. the plaintiff 's insistence was on account of the fact that she wanted trained workers to continue the operations in the portion of tea estate which fell to her share. it is submitted on behalf of the defendants that when the plaintiff took over a certain number of workers all the obligations qua them would be deemed to be taken over by her. in our view this submission has substance. the plaintiff was fully conscious of her obligations qua the workers when she took over them. it is also on record that the plaintiff sold the part of the tea estate which came to her share soon after getting its possession. therefore we are not inclined to entertain the claim regarding liability towards gratuity with respect to the workers allotted to the plaintiff to be reopened at this stage. the other question raised in these appeals is regarding award of interest. the same stands concluded by our judgment in c.a.nos. -. for reasons stated in the said judgment this claim is hereby rejected. the result is that these appeals fail and are hereby dismissed with no order as to costs. the predecessors in the interest to the parties have been carrying on business in plantation and sale of tea under the name and style of bengorm nilgiri plantations company since. the said $$$ the husband of the plaintiff -respondent was a partner in the said firm having % share therein. the firm was reconstituted from time to time. the firm was reconstituted on.with effect from.. $$$ died on may. on his death the remaining partners reconstituted the firm ignoring the claim of the plaintiff. she was not paid any amount towards her share. the bengorm tea estate comprised of acres of land wherein $$$ had % interest. the said estate was a joint family property and not an assets of the partnership firm. in the aforementid situation a suit came to be filed by the plaintiff herein praying inter alia for the following reliefs:"(a decree for partitions by metes and bounds of the plaintiff 's % share in bengorm estate mentid in schedule to the plaint and separate possession thereof against defendants to and/ or in severally.a decree for accounts against the defendants for the % share of $$$ deceased in the defendant no. in respect of profits and monies to his credits and in the assets of the firm including stocks in trade stores and spares standing crops investments provisions reserves and goodwill as mentid in paragraph of the plaint and decree for the amount found to be due to the plaintiff as ascertained in this suit on enquiry with interest at % per annum from may.decree for accounts for mesne profits or illegal gains from may till payment as mentid in paragraph of the plaint and decree for the amount found to be due to the plaintiff as ascertained in this suit on enquiry with interest at per annum from the date herein.for appointment of $$$(e for the costs of the suit and(f for such other reliefs as to this hon'ble court may seem fit and proper in the circumstances of the case. the trial court in terms of its judgment and preliminary decree dated.did not grant any relief in respect of prayers a and treating the business as run by the partnership and granted relief in favour of the plaintiff in relation to prayer only with % interest thereon. the plaintiff there against filed an appeal before the high court. the high court while allowing the said appeal also granted enhanced interest at the bank rate varying between % and % upon allowing an application for amendment of plaint claiming interest at the rate of % p.a. special leave petitions filed by the appellants herein -against the impugned judgment and the other against the order allowing amendment were summarily dismissed by this court. a final decree proceeding was thereafter initiated which was numbered as o.s. no. of. i.a. no. of was filed by the plaintiff purported to be under order rule and order rule of code of civil procedure for passing a final decree for partition and award of mesne profits in terms of the preliminary decree. i.a. no. of was filed by her under order rule and section of code of civil procedure for passing a decree for mesne profits for the period.till the date of delivery of possession. by a common judgment dated.the learned district judge disposed of the said applications in terms whereof the commissir was directed to sell the bungalows the factory and ancillary buildings by holding a private auction amongst the parties and deposit the sale proceeds in the court. in i.a. no. of the court directed the defendants to pay unto the plaintiff a sum of rs.with simple interest at the rate of % per annum on.and with simple interest at the rate of % per annum on rs.from.till date of realisation. the defendants were further directed to bear the proportionate costs of the suit. being aggrieved thereby and dissatisfied therewith the plaintiff preferred an appeal there against which was marked as a.s. no. of. the defendants to and also preferred an appeal against the said judgment which was marked as a.s. no. of. the plaintiff also filed i.a. no. of praying therein that possession of the properties to the extent of her share be delivered free from all encumbrances like gratuity liability etc. on.an order was passed holding the defendant nos. to liable to pay gratuity to workers from.to.. the said order came to be challenged by the defendants by filing a c.r.p. being no. of. another interlocutory application marked as i.a. no. of was filed to incorporate the items missing articles and gratuity deposits in the final decree passed in o.s. no. of which was allowed. there against also the defendants preferred an appeal before the high court which was marked as a.s. no. of. on.an order was passed in i.a. no. of amending the operative portion of the final decree where against also the defendants preferred a civil revision application marked as c.r.p. no. of. the trial judge further made some corrections in the decree which again became a subject matter of civil revision application before the high court. by reason of the impugned judgment the high court disposed of all the matters. the parties herein have preferred appeals before this court against the judgment of the high court. various other interlocutory applications were also filed before the district court. the orders passed thereon were subject matter of different civil revision applications details whereof are not required to be adverted to herein. in the said proceedings it is pertinent to note that $$$ and joint $$$ had been appointed. the high court having regard to the nature of controversy and upon taking into consideration the fact the mesne profits were required to be evaluated at the suggestions of the parties appointed a commissir. the commissir inter alia upon examining the books of accounts of the partnership firm submitted a report before the high court. the plaintiff filed objections there against. it was directed that the report of the commissir shall be taken on file in a.s. no. of and would be considered at the time of the hearing of the appeal. the high court did not accept the commissir 's report on assigning sufficient and cogent reasons therefore. in doing so it inter alia took into consideration the observations made by it on the earlier round of litigation namely a.s. no. of to the effect that the defendants had every reason to manipulate the accounts because they intended to deprive the plaintiff of her due share. it also took into consideration the fact that at the initial stage of the litigation the defendants had made an offer of only rs.towards the interest of the plaintiff in relation to the valuable assets belonging to her husband. it further opined that the books of accounts whereupon the commissir had relied upon was not proved by the defendant who according to the defendant knew thereabout entry by entry. mr. $$$ the defendant who examined himself as r.w.according to the high court did not know about the entries in the books of account. the high court was furthermore of the opinion that the entries in the books of account were required to be proved by independent materials and they by themselves are not admissible as evidence. the high court further pointed out that the defendants have committed several irregularities in maintaining the books of account stating:"all the family members of the defendants have been operating the accounts. the personal expenses of the defendants and their family members are debited to the account of the firm. it is even seen that several foreign trips undertaken by the defendant and his wife were made at the expenses of the firm. even small items of expenditure like personal gifts made to sisters hotel expenses club expenses and the like find a place in the firm accounts. defendants can not be heard to say that club expenses and travel expenses were intended to promote the business since during the life time of $$$ no such expenses were incurred by the firm. further we find from ex.a-9 that there were over drawings made by the defendants even beyond their capital contribution. and all the monies borrowed from central bank of india were diverted by the defendants to their own other companies like kodanadu estate $$$ and powraj chemicals etc. it also noticed the fact that the defendants had entered into transactions with their sister concerns. before the high court it is relevant to notice that it was contended that the genuineness of the said books of account was not disputed. the books of accounts it was urged also came to be accepted by the income -tax department. the high court however on analyzing the materials on records found the said pleas to be unacceptable. by way of example it noticed that while the price of green leaves per kilogram of tea was rs.such leaves were purchased from kodanad tea estate a cistern concern of the defendants at the price of rs.per kilogram. it was also found that no such admission was made on behalf of the plaintiffs. it was observed:"even assuming that there was such an admission by the counsel it would not certainly bind the plaintiff. as regard quantification of the mesne profit the high court relied upon various circumstances in support of its conclusions. it noticed that the tea estate was making profit since. it was observed that even when the area was going through severe drought the tea estate at the hands of joint $$$ made a sizeable profit in and thus was capable of making a sizeable profit throughout. the high court pointed out that the firm had been earning profits from to of more than rs. lakhs per annum except in when the profit earned came down to rs.and as such there was no reason as to why the profit should have come down after. in the aforementid situation the high court calculated the quantum of mesne profit on the basis of the profits earned by the joint $$$ from.onwards for $$$$ months. the high court further noticed that the defendant has not exhibited any document to show the profits for the period.to.and the commissir thus committed a manifest error in failing to take note thereof. it was further pointed out that even account of -was not produced by the defendants. it found that the commission without any basis whatsoever arrived at certain figures for the subsequent period beginning from.holding:"it is not known how the commission got the figures for the subsequent period from --. if the plaintiff 's share in the profits for the period --to --is to be calculated on the basis of the receivers accounts for the period --to --the amount would come to rs.. even if the amount i d calculated on the basis of the profits for $$$$ --it will be more than rs. even as it is the commission has worked out the share of the plaintiff at rs.. if the share of the plaintiff for the period.to.is calculated as above the total will exceed rs. which will be more than the total amount claimed by the plaintiff. it was further noticed that in any event the plaintiff could not be made liable for any part of the loss purported to have been suffered by the firm as it was for it to compensate the plaintiff for the user of her share in the immovable properties and the mesne profit has to be worked out only after payment of such compensation. it thus came to the conclusion that irrespective of the fact as to whether the firm was earning any profit or not the plaintiff was entitled to be suitably compensated. the court found that even if the commissir 's report after making necessary correction of the mistakes contained therein is accepted the plaintiff would be entitled to mesne profit amounting to a sum of rs. which would exceed the amount claimed by her. the court noticed that the $$$ had filed a calculation memo wherefrom it would appear that the plaintiff 's claim for her share of mesne profits comes to rs. the said figure was arrived at on the basis of the capital value of the entire tea estate being rs. in. the high court observed:"p.w. guha the $$$ has filed a calculation memo regarding the plaintiff 's claim for her share of mesne profits at rs. he states in his evidence that his calculation is based on the capital value of the entire tea estate. he has adopted the value of the entire estate rs. in and proceeded to estimate the reasonable return at the rate of % of the value. the value of the plaintiff 's % share in the entire estate in was rs. on the basis of % of the value of plaintiff 's % share he arrived at the figure rs. he has added interest to the return from the capital and shown the amount due as rs. he took into account the increase in the value of the estate during the years and fixed the $$$$ return from the property in at rs. from to he has estimated the return on this basis. for $$$$ he calculated the return at rs. per annum. from he has proceeded on the basis that the $$$$ return at rs. he has calculated interest on the basis of the above said mode of the calculation as on.according to him the value of the plaintiff 's share of mesne profits was rs. the high court further considered the matter from another angle that is to say as to what amount the estate could have earned had it been given on rent and on the said basis it come to the conclusion that even % share belonging to $$$ would have fetched rs.. it further took into consideration the profit which was being earned by the competing neighbouring tea estates. according to p.w. the plaintiff 's share of mesne profit for the relevant period would have been calculated at rs. it was in the aforementid premises the high court held that the plaintiff was at least entitled to the amount rs. as claimed by her. it further opined that the reference to the commissir by the high court was not in accordance with rules inasmuch as a commissir appointed in terms of the provisions of the code of civil procedure could not have been made a quasi arbitrator although the law relating to arbitration was no to be made applicable. the submission of mr. $$$ is that having regard to the fact that the parties are co -owners the question as regard quantification of mesne profit should have been considered strictly in terms of order rule of the code of civil procedure. the learned counsel would contend that having regard to the fact that there has been no suppression as regard the quantum of yield of tea from the tea estate and as no major irregularities have been found in respect thereof the commissir could not be held to have committed a manifest error in relying on the books of account maintained by them. we do not agree. mesne profit has been defined in section of the code of civil procedure to mean as profits which the person in wrongful possession of property actually received or might with ordinary diligence would have received therefrom together with interest on such profits. a decree for mesne profit was granted in favour of the plaintiff respondent for wrongful use of the property. the quantum of mesne profit can be arrived at by the high court keeping in view the well -known principles of valuation for determining the same. the court is not enjoined with any duty to accept the quantification determined only on the basis of books of account maintained by the defendants particularly when the same had not been proved. the high court in our opinion has rightly considered the matte from different angle. even if any of the methods adverted to the high court and referred to hereinbefore is adopted the plaintiff would have been entitled to much more amount than claimed by her. we are therefore of the opinion that the findings of the high court being just and proper need not be interfered with. so far as the question of rate of interest is concerned it may be noticed that the high court itself found that the rate of interest should have been determined at %. the principles of res judicata which according to the high court would operate in the case in our opinion is not applicable. principles of res -judicata is a procedural provision. the same has no application where there is inherent lack of jurisdiction. in chief justice of a.p. and anr. v. i.v.a. dikshitulu and ors. etc. $$$ / sc/0/$$$$$$$ / sc/0/$$$$ the law is stated in the following terms:"2. as against the above shri vepa sarathy appearing for the respective respondent in c.a. of and in c.a. of submitted that when his client filed a writ petition no. of under article of the constitution in the high court for impugning the order of his compulsory retirement passed by the chief justice he had served in accordance with rule of the andhra pradesh high court original side rule notice on the chief justice and the government $$$ and in consequence at the preliminary hearing of the writ petition before the division bench the government $$$ appeared on behalf of all the respondents including the chief justice and raised a preliminary objection that the writ petition was not maintainable in view of clause of the andhra pradesh administrative tribunal order made by the president under article which had taken away that jurisdiction of the high court and vested the same in administrative tribunal. this objection was accepted by the high court and as a result the writ petition was dismissed in limine. in these circumstances -proceeds the argument -the appellant is now precluded on principles of res judicata and estoppel from taking up the position that the tribunal 's order is without jurisdiction. but when shri sarathi 's attention was invited to the fact that no notice was actually served on the chief justice and that the government pleader who had raised this objection had not been instructed by the chief justice or the high court to put in appearance on their behalf the counsel did not pursue this contention further. moreover this is a pure question of law depending upon the interpretation of article. if the argument holds good it will make the decision of the tribunal as having been given by an authority suffering from inherent lack of jurisdiction. such a decision can not be sustained merely by the doctrine of res judicata or estoppel as urged in the case. in dwarka prasad agarwal d by lrs. and anr. v. b.d. agarwal and ors. $$$ / sc/00/200$$$ / sc/00/200 air200sc2 it is $$$ is now well -settled that an order passed by a court without jurisdiction is a nullity. any order passed or action taken pursuant thereto or in furtherance thereof would also be nullities. in the instant case as the high court did not have any jurisdiction to record the compromise for the reasons stated hereinbefore and in particular as no writ was required to be issued having regard to the fact that public law remedy could not have been resorted to the impugned orders must be held to be illegal and without jurisdiction and are liable to be set aside. all orders and actions taken pursuant to or in furtherance thereof must also be declared wholly illegal and without jurisdiction and consequently are liable to be set aside. they are declared as such. in shree bharat laxmi wool store $$$ and ors. v. punjab national bank and anr. $$$ / sc/009/992$$$ / sc/009/992 air992sc2 this court held:"in the instant case the suit was filed on april. the amendment of section referred to above therefore clearly is not applicable. the court is required to allow proper rate of interest under the unamended section. as we have seen earlier. section has parts part covering the period from the date of suit till the date of decree and covering the period from the date of decree till the date of payment. we are concerned only with the part. the trial court has awarded interest more than per cent under the unamended provisions for the period from the date of decree till payment. the high court appears to have not noticed the non -applicability of the amendment to suits filed prior to the amendment. we therefore are of the opinion that in the facts and circumstances of the present case the principles of res judicata was not applicable. the only other question which survives for consideration is computation of net amount payable in terms of the decree in relation to prayer b of the suit as determined in the final decree dated.. in the suit a decree in respect of the following items was prayed for:" % share of profit and monies lying to the credit of late pravinlal madhavni in the assets of partnership firm m / s bengorm tea planation company as on.on account of dissolution of the said firm upon death of late pravin madhavani and % share in the capital assets and goodwill of the said firm.stock in trade $$$ as on.-% shareiii stores and spares $$$ as on.-% shareiv standing crops $$$ as on. -% sharev investments $$$ as on.% sharevi provisions $$$ as on.-% sharevii reserves $$$ as on.-% shareviii $$$ $$$ as on.-% shareix capital assets $$$ as on.% share". admittedly no appeal was filed against the preliminary decree. thus it attained finality. the trial court in its judgment found that a sum of rs.is due to the plaintiff where for the loan taken by the husband of the plaintiff as proprietor of darjeeling tea plantation company and liabilities towards income tax adjusted had already been deducted the details whereof are as under:"amount found payable 		 rs.dtp loan 	 rs..2less towards income tax 	 rs.towards firms tax 	 rs.share -% of rs. ,..	 rs. 		 rs.missing articles 		 rs.		 rs. ,2,.amounts receivable by the plaintiff were as under share in the assets of the firm: % share of. being difference of receivable over payable as par balance sheet of.	 rs. .% share of further claims on pro -rata basis for.on the basis of balance sheet and profit & loss account as on.	 rs.% share in the $$$ of the firm as on.	 rs.-.balance in current account or.before crediting profit for the period.	 rs..-. profit actually credited in -balance sheet on.rs. + -as in bengorm nilgiri plantations. co 	 rs.-.amount. due by darjeeling plantations co. in the books of bengorm nilgiri plantation co.	 rs.-.. othep adjustments amounts due being refunds of it arid $$$ it as per accounts 	 rs.  due by us for payments made by bengorm for it and agrl 	 rs.following chart shows the accounts as prepared by the parties. the amounts receivables inter alia are closing stock stores and spares and loans and advances. so far as the closing stock is concerned the plaintiff stated that the defendants inclusion of rs.on.is a duplicate as on the said rate they had shown the profit and loss as income as also on the assets side in the balance sheet of bengorm nilgiri plantations co. on.being $$$$ they have also taken the same amount from the income and thus making nil profit towards that. it has therefore been contended that this amount is an asset and rightly included as a receivable. pro -rate profit to the extent of rs.has been claimed as the defendants have shown a larger profit during the period.to.and less profit from.to.. a higher profit has been shown for a period of month days and less profit has been shown for days. the plaintiff claimed the entire amount having regard to the fact that the profit of $$$$ has been apportid. we do not see any illegality in the order of the high court in this regard. so far as the goodwill is concerned the submission of mr. naik is that the goodwill of the tea estate had been offered to the plaintiff but she declined the same. further contention of mr. naik is that as the plaintiff has sold her share in the tea estate for a sum of rs. lakhs including goodwill of the firm she can not claim the same. further contention of mr. naik is that as the tea is sold at auction house it having no brand name did not have any goodwill. $$$ as lord $$$ described a thing very easy to describe very difficult to define in inland revenue commissir v. muller & co. ac. the term goodwill signifies the value of the business in the hands of a successor so far as increased by the continuity of the undertaking being preserved in the shape of the right to use the old name and otherwise. it is something more than a mere chance of probability of old customers maintaining their connection though this is a material part of the practical fruits. $$$ may be the whole advantage belonging to the firm its reputation as also connection thereof. it thus means that every affirmative advantage as contrasted with negative advantage that has been acquired in carrying on the business whether connected with the premises of business or its name or style everything connected with or carrying the benefit of the business. in halsbury 's laws of england fourth edition volume at page the law is stated in the following terms:"20. $$$ generally right to use name sale to a partner. the goodwill of the business carried on by a partnership forms part of the assets to be realised on distribution. if the goodwill is not sold each partner may use the name of the firm if by doing so he does not hold out the other partners as still being partners with him. if a partner agrees to retire and his partners buy his share but do not take any express assignment of the goodwill they are not entitled to continue the use of his name as part of the firm name and where a business is carried on under the name solely or with any addition of an outgoing partner who is still living and not bankrupt a purchaser of the business including the goodwill is not entitled to use the name of the outgoing partner in such a way as to suggest that he is still connected with the business unless the right to use the firm name is expressly assigned. on dissolution a partner may advertise that he is no longer connected with a periodical that the firm publishes.where the goodwill becomes on dissolution the property of of the partners either by purchase in the ordinary way or pursuant to a provision in the articles the outgoing partner or partners may not carry on a similar business in the name of the old firm and may not solicit old customers. the goodwill is generally considered to be an asset of the partnership. in the aforementioned volume of halsbury 's laws of england at page it is further stated:"20. when goodwill is to be treated as an asset. although generally the goodwill should be included where under the partnership articles a general account and valuation is to be taken on the death of a partner the value of the goodwill should not in the absence of contrary agreement be included in the firm 's periodical balance sheets and therefore where the value of the share of a decreased partner is by agreement governed by the balance sheet his estate is not entitled to treat the goodwill as an asset.where a surviving partner sells the partnership business the estate of his deceased partner is entitled to a share of the purchase money representing the value if any of the goodwill but having regard to the rights of the surviving partners to carry on a similar business this value maybe infinitesimal.it is unlawful for a medical practitioner whose name is entered on any list of medical practitioners undertaking to provide general medical services under the national health service to sell any part of the goodwill of his medical practice. the goodwill has been claimed for the firm 's continuous business since. the court has proceeded to calculate the amount of goodwill on the basis of the profits derived by the firm for the last years on an average. it is not contended that such a method is unknown in commercial field. whenever a firm is dissolved the value of the goodwill has to be worked out and divided between the partners. the district judge as also the high court had assigned sufficient and cogent reasons for awarding a sum of rs.towards the plaintiff 's share in goodwill. the defendant examining himself categorically stated that the firm is the only which has been continuously doing business since. we do not therefore find any infirmity in the judgment of the courts below in this regard. so far as the loan amount to rs.is concerned it appears that the same stood adjusted as far back as in the year. the learned district judge in his judgment has recorded:"the debt due from m / s. darjeeling tea plantations company sands adjusted by taking of accounts as per ex. $$$. the respondent obtained the reserve bank permission ex. b and has adjusted the debt due from darjeeling tea plantations company to bengorm firm on.. in the balance sheets subsequent to the darjeeling tea plantation company is not shown as a debtor and demand of payment was not made. it was further observed:"the debt due from the darjeeling tea plantations company to the bangorm firm has been adjusted in and the debt is no longer subsisting and no amount is due from darjeeling tea company to the bengorm firm is the admission of r.w. the debt due from darjeeling tea plantations company has been adjusted as on.as per the admission of r.w. the debt due from darjeeling tea plantations company to the bengorm firm has to be adjusted as on.is admitted by the respondents to in paragraph of ex. a109. the claim of the appellant to the effect that the plaintiff 's husband was liable to pay % interest to the defendants has been rejected by the high court inter alia on the ground that no such case had been made out in the written statements. even no counter claim therefore was filed. we therefore accept the reasonings of the high court recorded in relation to the said items. for the reasons aforementioned i respectfully agree with the opinion of brother $$$ j.