. $$$ in filing the application(s for substitution if any is condoned. application(s for substitution if any is are allowed. $$$ if any in filing the special leave petitions is condoned. leave granted. these appeals are directed against the judgment(s and order(s passed by the high court of punjab and $$$ in a batch of regular first appeals whereby and whereunder the high court had disposed of all the matters in light of its judgment and order in r.f.a. no. of and connected matters dated.. the lis in this batch pertains to acquisition of various lands situated principally in villages fatehpur maheshpur kundli and railley by the respondent -state under different $$$ issued under section of the land acquisition act for short the act in..and.. since the impugned judgment(s and order(s in all the matters have either followed or relied upon the impugned judgment and order passed by the high court in r.f.a. no. of s.l.p. c nos. -of before this court for the sake of convenient disposal of this case we would only notice the facts in s.l.p. c nos. -of. $$$ facts of the leas case are the respondent -state had issued a notification under section of the act to acquire certain lands in the aforesaid villages for the public purpose of development and utilization of land of panchkula by haryana urban development authority under the haryana urban development authority act dated.. after due consideration of the objections filed by the land -loosers under section 5-a of the act the acquiring authority had recommended issuance of a notification under section of the act to the state government. accordingly the state government had issued a notification declaring that the said land would be acquired for the notified public purpose dated.. the land acquisition collector for short the lac by an award dated.awarded the compensation at the rate of lakh per acre in respect of the claimants land. the claimants not being satisfied with the compensation so awarded by the lao approached the latter and sought for a reference under section of the act to the civil court for determination of the actual market value of the land acquired by the state government. the lac had referred the case of the land -loosers to the reference court. the reference court determined the market value of the acquired lands at per square yard by award dated.. dissatisfied by the aforesaid award claimants and the respondent -state filed regular first appeals before the high court. the high court remanded the said appeals to the reference court for fresh adjudication of the market value of the acquired lands by order dated.. since all the matters were remanded to the reference court it would be appropriate to notice the compensation awarded by the various awards passed by the reference court in respect to the lands acquired in the villages with the common thread of reasoning. the awards dated..and.qua the properties acquired through notification dated.determined the compensation at the rate of per sq. yd.while the awards dated.and.qua the properties acquired through notification dated.determined the compensation at per sq. yd. and per sq. yd.respectively. aggrieved by the aforesaid the claimants approached the high court in regular first appeals for determination of compensation by way of enhancement over the compensation assessed by the reference court. cross appeals were filed by the respondent -state against the judgment(s and order(s passed by the reference court. the high court delved into the basis and principles adopted for valuation of the acquired property by the reference court. the high court has noticed that the aforesaid villages are in close proximity of each other. to assess the fair market value of the acquired lands the high court has relied upon the sale transactions in the villages to evaluate the true market value and adopted the principle of averaging to ensure that spikes in prices that are registered through certain transactions in same locality ought not affect the determination of market price for all the properties. further considering the fact that the property valuations have been taken up with reference to lands of various sizes and more particularly of smaller plots the high court has calculated a deduction at.% towards development charges. in light of the aforesaid the high court has taken the average value of the exemplar properties and arrived at the fair market value of per square yard and after deduction of.% towards development charges ascertained the compensation payable at the rate of per square yard in respect of the lands acquired vide notification dated.. in respect of the notification dated.the high court has considered that an escalation of % per year requires to be provided for such acquired lands because the properties enure benefit of being situated in an urban locality and proximity to chandigarh and therefore enhanced the compensation to per sq. yard. in the result the high court has dismissed the appeals filed by the claimants and allowed the cross appeals filed by the state and reduced the compensation awarded by the reference court to per square yard. at this juncture it would be pertinent to notice that some of the cases in this batch of appeals relate to notification dated.. these cases have been disposed of by the high court in various judgment(s and order(s which have followed the decision of the high court in rfa no. of dated.. in rfa no. of the high court by placing reliance on the judgment and order passed in rfa no. of and connected matters has drawn parity in respect of acquisitions being from the same village and adopted the reasoning in the aforesaid decision. thus the high court has observed that since the exemplar properties were acquired in the average value would be per square yard and upon.% deduction would amount to per square yard. taking note of the fact that the compensation awarded by the reference court is per square yard and higher than the aforesaid amount the high court has continued the said amount as compensation and dismissed the appeals. aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment(s and order(s passed by the high court the claimants are before us in these appeals. heard learned counsel for the parties to the lis and also perused the judgment(s and order(s passed by the courts below. since all the cases question the reasoning adopted by the high court in rfa no. of and connected matters it would be apposite to consider the same only. the reference court has considered the contiguity of villages where acquired lands are situated and thereafter considered that the sale transactions produced by the claimants are much prior in time than the award passed by reference court in $$$ v. state of haryana where lands in adjoining villages judian and kundi were acquired vide notification dated.. in our view since the said notification is most proximate to the date of notification that is.it would be the best piece of evidence in respect of assessment of fair market value of the lands acquired herein. further to ascertain the escalation in prices since earlier notification the reference court has relied upon the judgment of this court in ongc ltd. v. $$$ manu / sc/7896/$$$$manu / sc/7896/$$$$ scc wherein this court has considered the quantum of such escalation per annum and whether it should be assessed at cumulative or flat rate. this court therein has observed as follows:"what should be the increase per annum?***5. normally recourse is taken to the mode of determining the market value by providing appropriate escalation over the proved market value of nearby lands in $$$$ as evidenced by sale transactions or acquisitions where there is no evidence of any contemporaneous sale transactions or acquisitions of comparable lands in the neighbourhood. the said method is reasonably safe where the relied -on sale transactions / acquisitions precede the subject acquisition by $$$$ that is up to to $$$$. beyond that it may be unsafe even if it relates to a neighbouring land. what may be a reliable standard if the gap is of $$$$ may become unsafe and unreliable standard where the gap is larger. for example for determining the market value of a land acquired in adopting the $$$$ increase method with reference to a sale or acquisition in or may have many pitfalls. this is because over the course of $$$$ the rate of $$$$ increase may itself undergo drastic change apart from the likelihood of occurrence of varying periods of stagnation in prices or sudden spurts in prices affecting the very standard of increase. much more unsafe is the recent trend to determine the market value of acquired lands with reference to future sale transactions or acquisitions. to illustrate if the market value of a land acquired in has to be determined and if there are no sale transactions / acquisitions of or prior to the date of preliminary notification the statistics relating to sales / acquisitions in future say of $$$$s -or -are taken as the base price and the market value in is worked back by making deductions at the rate of % to % per annum. how far is this safe of the fundamental principles of valuation is that the transactions subsequent to the acquisition should be ignored for determining the market value of acquired lands as the very acquisition and the consequential development would accelerate the overall development of the surrounding areas resulting in a sudden or steep spurt in the prices. let us illustrate. let us assume there was no development activity in a particular area. the appreciation in market price in such area would be slow and minimal. but if some lands in that area are acquired for a residential / commercial / industrial layout there will be all round development and improvement in the infrastructure / amenities / facilities in the next or years as a result of which the surrounding lands will become more valuable. even if there is no actual improvement in infrastructure the potential and possibility of improvement on account of the proposed residential / commercial / industrial layout will result in a higher rate of escalation in prices. as a result if the $$$$ increase in market value was around % per annum before the acquisition the $$$$ increase of market value of lands in the areas neighbouring the acquired land will become much more say % to % or even more on account of the development / proposed development. therefore if the percentage to be added with reference to previous acquisitions / sale transactions is % per annum the percentage to be deducted to arrive at a market value with reference to future acquisitions / sale transactions should not be % per annum but much more. the percentage of standard increase becomes unreliable. courts should therefore avoid determination of market value with reference to subsequent / future transactions. even if it becomes inevitable there should be greater caution in applying the prices fetched for transactions in future. be that as it may.whether the increase should be at a cumulative rate or a flat rate?8. the increase in market value is calculated with reference to the market value during $$$$. when market value is sought to be ascertained with reference to a transaction which took place $$$$ before the acquisition the method adopted is to calculate $$$$ to year increase. as the percentage of increase is always with reference to the previous year 's market value the appropriate method is to calculate the increase cumulatively and not applying a flat rate. the difference between the methods is shown by the following illustration with reference to a % increase over a basic price of per square metre):9. we may also point out that application of a flat rate will lead to anomalous results. this may be demonstrated with further reference to the above illustration. in regard to the sale transaction in where the price was per square metre if the $$$$ increase to be applied is a flat rate of % the increase will be per annum during each of the years and. if the price increase is to be determined with reference to sale transaction of the year when the price was per square metre the flat rate increase will be.per annum for the years and. if the price increase is determined with reference to a sale transaction of the year when the price was per square metre then the flat rate increase will be.per annum for the years and. it will thus be seen that even if the percentage of increase is constant the application of a flat rate leads to different amounts being added depending upon the market value in $$$$. on the other hand the cumulative rate method will lead to consistency and more realistic results. whether the base price is rs. or rs.or rs.the increase will lead to the same result. the logical practical and appropriate method is therefore to apply the increase cumulatively and not at a flat rate.emphasis supplied in italics)21. in light of the aforesaid view of this court the reference court has correctly ascertained the premium to be paid at the rate of % per annum with cumulative effect from the date of earlier acquisition dated.to the acquisition herein dated.and therefore determined the fair market value of acquired lands as per square yards. in our view the high court has incorrectly relied upon the sale transactions which date much prior in time than the date of notification and thus do not reflect the true market value. in the event of an award more proximate to the date of acquisition was available it would have been proper for the high court to consider the same as best evidence than the post -dated sale transactions. thus in our considered opinion the judgment and order passed by the high court does not fairly and adequately assess the compensation payable to the claimants and requires to be set aside and consequently the judgment and order passed by the reference court requires to be restored. therefore the judgment and order passed by the high court is set aside and the judgment and order passed by the reference court is restored. in our considered opinion we deem it appropriate to pass the following order with regard to acquisition of compensation awarded by the reference court i.per sq. yard per annum is restored with all statutory benefits on the enhanced amount as provided under the act.with regard to acquisitions of and 1994taking the base of acquisition we fix the compensation at per sq. yard per annum. we also grant % escalation to be calculated cumulatively as provided under the act.ordered accordingly.