$$$ j. the present case involves the court going through a dense jungle which consists of the u.p. imposition of ceiling on land holdings act hereinafter referred to as the principal act and amendment acts made thereto. with the help of learned counsel for both the sides we have waded through the various sections and $$$ -sections of these acts only for the purpose of having to decide basic question as to whether ceiling proceedings in respect of the land in question have lapsed owing to section of the amendment act. the brief facts necessary to decide the present case are as follows. a notice under section of the principal act was served upon the tenure -holder kamla devi to file objections against a proposal to declare.acres as surplus land. pursuant to the said notice objections were filed by the late kamla devi as also by appellants to her legal heirs. according to the appellants on a correct construction of the act there was no surplus land. meanwhile the prescribed authority under the act passed an order dated.by which order the entire land that was the subject matter of the notice was declared surplus. an appeal filed against the prescribed authority 's order met with the same fate and was dismissed on.. it is important to note that an argument was raised that the proceedings had abated which argument was answered by the appellate authority by saying that no fresh notice had been issued under section of the amendment act and as this was so the proceedings had not abated. a writ petition that was filed in was ultimately disposed of on.where by the judgment under appeal the writ petition was dismissed. several points were argued with which we are not at present concerned. the argument on abatement met the same fate as the judgment by the appellate authority. before adverting to the submissions of learned counsel for both parties it is important to put the horse before the cart. a brief survey of the principal act as well as the amendment acts must now be undertaken. the act is an act to provide for the imposition of ceiling on land holdings in the state of uttar pradesh. under the principal act the ceiling area of a tenure -holder was said to be acres of fair quality land and where the tenure -holder has a family consisting of more than members to the ceiling area of such tenure -holder is to be added acres of fair quality land for every additional member of the family subject to a maximum of acres. fair quality land was defined in the principal act as meaning land the hereditary rate of which is above rs. per acre under the act. a general notice was to be given to tenure -holders holding land in excess of the ceiling area so that they could submit a statement in respect thereof. a quasi -judicial determination is then to be made of surplus land where objections are filed and the prescribed authority after affording the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard and of producing evidence is then to decide their objections after recording reasons and then determine the extent of surplus land. an appeal is provided to the district judge whose decision is then made final and conclusive. the prescribed authority is then to notify in the official gazette the surplus land so determined. on the date of such notification such surplus land shall vest in the state free from all encumbrances and on / from that date all right title and interest of all persons in such land shall stand extinguished. the principal act then contains machinery for distribution of surplus land inter alia to cooperative societies of landless agricultural labourers. compensation is given by the principal act for vesting of surplus land of land -holders. with this prefaratory note it is important now to set out the relevant sections of the aforesaid act.section. definitions. in this act unless there is anything repugnant in the subject of context-(b fair quality land means land the hereditary rate whereof is above rupees per acre;section. ceiling area.$$$ject to the provisions of this act the ceiling area applicable to a tenure -holder shall be calculated after taking into account all the land in any holding in the state held by him in his own right whether in his own name or ostensibly in the name of any person.the ceiling area of a tenure -holder shall be acres of fair quality land.where the tenure -holder has or consists of a family having more than members the ceiling area of such tenure -holder shall be the area mentid in clause a together with acres of fair quality land for every additional member of the family subject to a maximum of -such acres provided that if at any time the family comes to consist of not more than members all land held by the tenure -holder in excess of the ceiling area under clause a shall become liable to be treated as surplus land.explanation -in calculating the ceiling area under this $$$ -section in respect of land other than fair quality land and -half acre of such land the hereditary rate whereof is above rupees per acre but does not exceed rupees per acre and acres of such land the hereditary rate whereof is rupees or less per acre will be deemed to be equal to acre of fair quality land.section. imposition of ceiling on existing land holdings.as and from the date of enforcement of this act no tenure -holder shall except as otherwise provided by this act be entitled to hold an area in excess of the ceiling area applicable to him anything contained in any other law custom or usage for the time being in force or agreement to the contrary notwithstanding.in determining the ceiling area applicable to a tenure -holder at the commencement of this act any transfer or partition of land made after the twentieth day of august which but for the transfer or partition would have been declared surplus land under the provisions of this act shall be ignored and not taken into account.the provisions of $$$ -section shall have no application to-(a a transfer in favour of the state government;(b a partition under the u.p. consolidation of holdings act or(c a partition of the holding of a joint hindu family made by a suit or proceeding pending on twentieth day of august.section. general notice to tenure -holders holding land in excess of ceiling area for submission of statement in respect thereof.soon as may be after the date of enforcement of this act the prescribed authority shall by general notice published in the official gazette call upon every tenure -holder holding land in excess of the ceiling area applicable to him on the date of enforcement of this act to submit to him within days of the date of publication of the notice a statement in respect of all his holdings in such form and giving such particulars as may be prescribed. the statement shall also indicate the plot or plots for which he claims exemption and also those which he would like to retain as part of the ceiling area applicable to him under the provisions of this act.section. determination of the surplus land by the prescribed authority where an objection is filed.where an objection has been filed under $$$ -section of section or under $$$ -section of section or because of any appellate order under section the prescribed authority shall after affording the parties reasonable opportunity of being heard and of producing evidence decide the objections after recording his reasons and determine the surplus land.$$$ject to any appellate order under section the order of the prescribed authority under $$$ -section shall be final and conclusive and be not questid in any court of law.section. appeals-( any party aggrieved by an order under $$$ -section of section or section may within days of the date of the order prefer an appeal to the district judge within whose jurisdiction the land or any part thereof is situate.the district judge shall dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible and his decision thereon shall be final and conclusive and be not questid in any court of law.where an appeal is preferred under this section the district judge may stay enforcement of the order appealed against for such time and on such conditions as may be considered just and proper.section. acquisition of surplus land.the prescribed authority shall-(i in case where the order passed under $$$ -section of section has become final or(ii in case where no appeal has been preferred under section after the expiry of the period of limitation provided therefor in case where an appeal has been preferred under section after its decision;notify in the official gazette the surplus land determined under sections or as the case may be.as from $$$$ of the notification under $$$ -section all such surplus land shall stand transferred to and vest except as hereinafter provided in the state free from all encumbrances and all rights title and interests of all persons in such land shall with effect from such date stand extinguished.on the publication of the notification under $$$ -section any person claiming interest as a tenure -holder or a lessee in possession from the tenure -holder in the surplus land in respect of which the notification has been published may within days thereof file an objection before the prescribed authority indicating the extent of his interest in such land.the prescribed authority shall for reasons to be recorded in writing dispose of the objections after affording to the objector the tenure -holder concerned and the state government reasonable opportunity of being heard and of producing evidence.any person aggrieved by an order under $$$ -section may within days of the date of the order prefer an appeal to the district judge in whose jurisdiction the land or any part thereof is situate. the order of the district judge shall be final and conclusive and be not questid in any court of law.in disposing of an objection of an appeal under this section the prescribed authority or the district judge as the case may be shall accept any decision of a court of competent jurisdiction in respect of the rights of the parties.no person other than a tenure -holder or a lessee of the tenure -holder whose right title or interest in the surplus land has been recognized under the provisions hereinbefore contained shall for purposes of this act be considered to have any right title or interest in the surplus land.) the collector may at any time after the publication of the notification under $$$ -section and subject to any order passed under $$$ -sections and take possession of the surplus land and may for that purpose use such force as may be necessary.section. settlement of surplus land.the state government shall settle out of the surplus land in a village in which no land is available for community purposes or in which the land as available is less than acres with the gaon samaj of the village so however that the total land in the village available for community purposes after such settlement does not exceed acres. the land so settled with the gaon samaj shall be used for planting trees growing fodder or for such other community purposes as may be prescribed.$$$ject to the provisions of $$$ -section where any surplus land had immediately preceding the date of vesting in the state under this act been held by a member of a co -operative society such land may if the society so desires be settled by the state government with the society.any surplus land remaining unsettled under the provisions of the preceding $$$ -sections may be settled by the state government:(a if the remaining land is less than acres in the village with a co -operative society of such tenure -holders at least -fourths of whom are holders of less than acres of land each if the remaining land is more than acres in the village with a co -operative society of landless agricultural labourers so however that the total land allotted to such society under this clause if equally divided between all the members would give to each not more than acres of land.any surplus land remaining after settlement under clause b of $$$ -section may be settled by the state government with any co -operative society no member whereof prior to such settlement holds more than acres of land in his own right. by an amendment act of being u.p. act of which came into force on.a wholesale substitution of various sections of the principal act was carried out. this is for the simple reason that the erstwhile scheme of determining surplus fair quality land was now substituted by a scheme which determined surplus irrigated land. even the ceiling limit of such land was changed to.hectares of irrigated land plus a maximum of hectares of additional land depending upon the size of the family. a new section was inserted conferring a power of review to the appellate authority under the act. the transitory provision contained in section of the amendment act then provided for abatement of proceedings that were pending at the time of commencement of the amendment act with a saving of proceedings that had already become final under the principal act. the relevant provisions of the u.p. imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act are set out hereunder section. $$$stitution of new sections for sections and of u.p. act of. for sections and of the u.p. imposition of ceiling on land holdings act hereinafter referred to as the principal act the following sections shall be substituted namely.. determination of area for purposes of ceiling and exemptions. for purposes of determining the ceiling area under section or any exemption under section --(i $$$ject to the provisions of clause ii and -half hectares of unirrigated land or and a half hectares of grove -land or and a half hectares of usar land shall count as hectare of irrigated land;(ii and a half hectares of any unirrigated land in the following areas namely-(a bundelkhand;(b trans -jamuna portions of allahabad etawah mathura and agra districts;(c cis -jamuna portions of allahabad fatehpur kanpur etawah mathura and agra districts up to kilometers from the deep stream of the jamuna;(d the portion of mirzapur district south of kaimur range;(e $$$ and $$$ $$$ of $$$ in mirzapur district;(f the portion of $$$ in mirzapur district which lies north of kaimur range;(g $$$ and the villages mentid in lists a and b of schedule vi to the uttar pradesh zamindari abolition and land reforms act in hilly patties of $$$ and bhagat of $$$ in mirzapur district and(h the area comprised in the former $$$ of naugarh or $$$ in $$$ district;(i hilly and $$$ area of kumaun and garhwal divisions and $$$ of $$$ district;shall count as hectare of irrigated land. imposition of ceiling.on and from the commencement of the uttar pradesh imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act no tenure -holder shall be entitled to hold in the aggregate throughout uttar pradesh any land in excess of the ceiling area applicable to him.$$$ject to the provisions of $$$ -sections and the ceiling area for purposes of $$$ -section shall be-(a in the case of a tenure -holder having a family of not more than members.hectares of irrigated land including land held by other members of his family plus additional hectares of irrigated land or such additional land which together with the land held by him aggregates to hectares for each of his adult sons who are either not themselves tenure -holders or who hold less than hectares or irrigated land subject to a maximum of hectares of such additional land;(b in the case of a tenure -holder having family of more than members.hectares of irrigated land including land held by other members of his family besides each of the members exceeding and for each of his adult sons who are not themselves tenure -holders or who hold less than hectares of irrigated land additional hectares of irrigated land or such additional land which together with the land held by such adult son aggregates to hectares subject to a maximum of hectares of such additional land.explanation -the expression ' adult son in clause a and includes an adult son who is dead and had left surviving behind him minor sons or minor daughters other than married daughters who are not themselves tenure -holders or who hold land less than hectares of irrigated land;(c in the case of a tenure -holder being a degree college imparting education in agriculture hectares of irrigated land;(d in the case of a tenure -holder being an intermediate college imparting education in agriculture hectares of irrigated land;(e in the case of any other tenure -holder.hectares of irrigated land.explanation -any transfer or partition of land which is liable to be ignored under $$$ -sections and shall be ignored also-(p for purposes of determining whether an adult son of a tenure -holder is himself a tenure -holder within the meaning of clause a);(q for purposes of service of notice under section.section. amendment of section.section of the principal act shall be re -numbered as $$$ -section thereof and after $$$ -section as so re -numbered the following $$$ -section shall be inserted namely-( as soon as may be after the enforcement of the uttar pradesh imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act the prescribed authority shall by like general notice call upon every tenure -holder holding land in excess of the ceiling area applicable to him on the enforcement of the said act to submit to him within days of publication of such notice a statement referred to in $$$ -section.where the tenure -holder 's wife holds any land which is liable to be aggrieved with the land held by the tenure -holder for purposes of determining of the ceiling areas the tenure -holder shall along with his statement referred to in $$$ -section also file the consent of his wife to the choice in respect of the plot or plots which they would like to retain as part of the ceiling areas applicable to them and where his wife 's consent is not so obtained the prescribed authority shall cause the notice under $$$ -section of section to be served on her separately.section. insertion of new section.after section of the principal act the following section shall be inserted namely:-a. re -determination of surplus land in certain cases.the prescribed authority may at any time within $$$$ years from the date of the notification under $$$ -section of section rectify any mistake apparent on the face of the record provided that no such rectification which has the effect of increasing the surplus land shall be made unless the prescribed authority has given a notice to the tenure -holder of its intention to do so and has given him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.the provisions of sections and shall mutatis mutandis apply in relation to any proceeding under $$$ -section and for purposes of application of section the notice under the proviso to $$$ -section shall be deemed to be a notice under section.section. transitory provisions.all proceedings for the determination of surplus land under section section section section section or section of the principal act pending before any court or authority at the time of the commencement of this act shall abate and the prescribed authority shall start the proceedings for determination of the ceiling area under that act afresh by issue of a notice under $$$ -section of section of that act as inserted by this act provided that the ceiling area in such cases shall be determined in the following manner:(a the ceiling area shall be determined in accordance with the principal act as it stood before its amendment by this act;(b $$$ the ceiling area shall be re -determined in accordance with the provisions of the principal act as amended by this act.notwithstanding anything in $$$ -section any proceeding under section or under chapter iii or chapter iv of the principal act in respect of any tenure -holder in relation to whom the surplus land has been determined finally before the commencement of this act may be continued and concluded in accordance with the provisions of the principal act without prejudice to the applicability of the provisions of $$$ -section of section and section of that act as inserted by this act in respect of such land. on.the u.p. imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act being u.p. act no. of came into force. interestingly certain changes were made to the new legislative scheme contained in the amendment. this act except for sections and was brought into force with effect from.which as we have already seen was the date of coming into force of the amendment act. this amendment act only added to the new substituted scheme the concept of single crop land. the relevant provisions of this act are set out hereinbelow section. short title and commencement.this act may be called the uttar pradesh imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act.this section and section shall come into force at once and the remaining sections shall be deemed to have come into force on june.section. amendment of section.in section of the principal act in clause ii)(a for the words and half hectares of any unirrigated land the words and -half hectares of single crop land or and a half hectares of any other unirrigated land shall be substituted;(b at the end the following explanation shall be inserted namely explanation -for the purposes of clause ii the expression ' single crop land means any unirrigated land capable of producing only crop in $$$$ in consequence of assured irrigation from any state $$$ or private irrigation work.section. transitory provision.where an order determining the surplus land in relation to a tenure -holder has been made under the principal act before the commencement of this act the prescribed authority may at any time within $$$$ years from the commencement of this act re -determine the surplus land in accordance with the principal act as amended by this act. an $$$ which further amended the principal act came into force on the th day of october. after the said $$$ lapsed the third amendment act of was brought into force being u.p. act of but with effect from the date of the $$$ namely.. in this amendment various other changes were made with which we are not directly concerned except that the fate of this appeal hinges on the correct construction of the transitory provision of this act namely section. the relevant sections of this amendment act are set out hereunder section. short title and commencement.this act may be called the uttar pradesh imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act.it shall be deemed to have come into force on october.section. amendment of section.in section of the principal $$$$ in $$$ -section the following proviso thereto shall be inserted namely provided that at any time after october the prescribed authority may by notice call upon any tenure -holder holding land in excess of the ceiling area applicable to him on the said date to submit to him within days from the date of service of such notice a statement referred to in $$$ -section or any information pertaining thereto.after $$$ -section the following $$$ -section shall be inserted every tenure -holder holding land in excess of the ceiling area on january or at any time thereafter who has not submitted the statement referred to in $$$ -section and in respect of whom no proceeding under this act is pending on october shall within days from the said date furnish to the prescribed authority a statement containing particulars of all land--(a held by him and the members of his family on january acquired or disposed of by him or by members of his family between january and october.section. amendment of section.in section of the principal act-(a for $$$ -section the following $$$ -section shall be substituted namely:( as from $$$$ of the notification under $$$ -section all such surplus land shall stand transferred to and vest in the state government free from all encumbrances and all rights title and interests of all persons in such land shall with effect from such date stand extinguished provided that the encumbrances if any shall be attached to the amount payable under section in substitution for the surplus land.$$$ -section and shall be omitted;(c for $$$ -section ) the following $$$ -section shall be substituted namely:( the collector may at any time after the publication of the notification under $$$ -section take possession of the surplus land and also of any ungathered crop or fruits of tree not being crops or fruits to which $$$ -section of section applies after evicting the tenure -holder or any other person found in occupation of such land and may for that purpose use or cause to be used such force as may be necessary provided that a tenure -holder may at any time voluntarily deliver possession to the collector over the whole or any part of the land held by him which has been or is likely to be declared surplus under and in accordance with the provisions of this act and thereupon the provisions of $$$ -section shall apply to such land as they apply to any surplus land specified in a notification under $$$ -section.section. transitory provisions.all proceedings under $$$ -section to of section of the principal act as it stood immediately before the commencement of the uttar pradesh imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment $$$ pending before any court or authority immediately before the date of such commencement shall be deemed to have abated on such date.where an order determining the surplus land in relation to a tenure -holder has been made under the principal act before january and the prescribed authority is required to re -determine the surplus land under section of the uttar pradesh imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act then notwithstanding anything contained in $$$ -section of section of the uttar pradesh imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act every appeal under section of the principal act or other proceedings in relation to such appeal preferred against the said order and pending immediately before the tenth day of october shall be deemed to have abated on the said date.where an order determining surplus land in relation to a tenure -holder has been made under the principal act before the tenth day of october the prescribed authority as defined in the principal act may at any time within $$$$ years from the said date re -determine the surplus land in accordance with the principal act as amended by this act whether or not any appeal was filed against such order and notwithstanding any appeal whether pending or decided against the original order of determination of surplus land.the provisions of section of the principal act shall mutatis mutandis apply to every order re -determining surplus land under $$$ -section of this section or section of the uttar pradesh imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act 7:provided that the period of days shall in the case of an appeal against the order referred to in section of the uttar pradesh imposition of ceiling or land holdings amendment act be computed from the date of such order or october whichever is later.the provisions of section of the principal act shall mutatis mutandis apply to every re -determination of surplus land under the section or under section of the uttar pradesh imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act.where any assessment roll has become final under $$$ -section of section before the sixteenth day of february this same shall not be reopened notwithstanding any amendment made in chapter of the principal act read with the schedule thereof by this act. given this thicket of statutory law made by the legislature of u.p.we have heard learned counsel on either side. $$$.u. singh learned senior advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants has made several submissions before us but ultimately submitted that on a correct construction of section the entire proceedings had abated and that therefore the appellate authority which passed an order dated.had no jurisdiction to do so. he argued that a conjoint reading of sections and would show that as all the requisite conditions of these $$$ -sections had been fulfilled the appeal preferred under section of the principal act which was pending before the th day of october shall be deemed to have abated on the said date. as no re -determination of surplus land was made in accordance with the principal act as amended by the amendment act according to learned counsel the period of years having gone long ago and no re -determination having been made the surplus land that is said to have been determined by the prescribed authority no longer has any legal sanctity. he made a faint argument that under section of the amendment proceedings had lapsed in any case but we were not inclined to accept that argument inasmuch as a general notice under section of the amendment act had been given to the tenure -holder which notice was not replied to by the said tenure -holder. this being the case section of the act obviously can not apply. learned senior counsel also cited before us judgments of this court being state of uttar pradesh v. mithilesh kumari and ors. supp.scc and $$$ and ors. v. state of u.p. and ors. $$$ / sc/0057/$$$$$$$ / sc/0057/$$$$ scc. however since these judgments have no direct application to the facts of the present case we do not consider it necessary to deal with them. $$$ on the other hand vehemently argued on behalf of the state of u.p. that the conditions under section not having been met the said section is inapplicable and that being the case the appellate authority correctly went ahead and heard the matter on merits and dismissed the appeal. his principal argument is that there are conditions precedent to the applicability of section of the amendment act. first there should be an order determining the surplus land which is made under the principal act before.and the prescribed authority must be required to re -determine surplus land under section of the amendment act. in his submission the pre -requisite is not met on the facts of the present case. this he argued is because section of the amendment act gave a discretion to the prescribed authority who may re -determine surplus land in accordance with the amendment made by the amendment. according to learned counsel the occasion for re -determination of surplus land on the present facts did not arise as on facts there is little or no unirrigated land that needs to be converted into irrigated land as per the formula contained in section of the act and that therefore the determination made in accordance with the amendment act which was in fact made by the order dated.would lead to the conclusion that that order would stand and does not need to be revisited. the argument of learned counsel for the state therefore leads us to analyze the acts in question a little closely. thing becomes clear at the outset that the original statutory scheme of which spoke of surplus fair quality land was substituted in its entirety by a completely new and different scheme by the amendment act of read with the amendment act of. both of these acts as has been noticed above with certain minor exceptions came into force on the same date namely.. the new statutory scheme would necessarily involve fair quality land being substituted by irrigated land the ceiling area in the cases also being entirely different. this being the case it is important to now construe section of the amendment act in this backdrop. be it noted that section itself comes into force only on.. for section to apply an order has to be made determining surplus land in relation to a tenure -holder before the commencement of the amendment act. by section this section and section both come into force at once i. on.. the expression this section refers to section which in turn refers to the act as the u.p. imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act. this being the case it is clear that the act has commenced only on.even though a number of sections shall be deemed to have come into force retrospectively i. on.. the order passed by the prescribed authority being on.the condition of section is met namely that this order has been passed before.. it is the part of the section on which a lot of the debate featured. according to learned counsel for the state a discretion is vested in the prescribed authority by use of the expression may. we may hasten to add that the very expression may at any time within $$$$ years..also occurs in section of the u.p. imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act. this sub -section makes it clear that the expression may goes along with the words at any time within $$$$ years..as it is clear that on a correct reading of the sub -section the prescribed authority has in every case to re -determine surplus land if an order determining surplus land has been made before the 0th day of october. the idea is that a period of years is given to re -determine surplus land in accordance with the principal act as amended by the u.p. imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act. this being the case it is clear that no discretion is vested in the prescribed authority to re -determine surplus land. surplus land has in all cases to be re -determined as a completely different and new scheme applicable to all lands has replaced the existing scheme. the only exception is where prior to.a determination of surplus land has been made finally that is an appeal has been disposed of under section. the matter may be looked at from a slightly different angle. section of the amendment act which is a transitory provision provides for abatement of proceedings that are pending on the commencement of the said act. we have already indicated that the pending proceedings of had to start afresh on the issue of a general notice under section as inserted by the amendment act of which was in fact done. thus the.order is a consequence of section of the act. section on facts has no application for the simple reason that surplus land had not in this case been determined finally before commencement of the act -that is an appeal had not been decided under section of the principal act prior to this date. this brings us then to the transitory provision contained in the u.p. imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act. under section clearly the order determining the surplus land in the present case had been made days before.and thus the condition or pre -requisite for the application of the section is met. the pre -requisite is also met for the simple reason that section of the act which forms part of the same legislative scheme as the amendment act would apply for the reason that an order determining surplus land had been made prior to commencement of the said act namely.which happens to be the same as the pre -requisite for the application of section of the amendment act of. this being the case the language of section makes it clear that every appeal preferred against such orders and pending immediately before the 10th day of october shall be deemed to have abated on the said date. on facts we are informed that an appeal had been filed prior to this date. this being the case it was necessary for the prescribed authority to re -determine surplus land under section in accordance with the principal act as amended by the act for which purpose the provisions of section of the principal act shall apply mutatis mutandis to every order re -determining surplus land under sub -section of this section or section of the amendment act-(vide section of the amendment act. this never having been done on facts in the present case it is clear that the appeal filed in has abated and could not therefore have been heard by the additional commissioner agra on merits. this being so the judgment and order passed by the commissioner dated.is without jurisdiction. it only remains to consider the reasoning of the appellate authority and the high court. both the appellate authority and the high court were of the view that no fresh notice had been issued under section of the u.p. imposition of ceiling on land holdings amendment act. it has been pointed out to us on facts that in fact such a notice had been issued on.. despite this the appellate authority and the high court in their anxiety to decide against abatement have wrongly held no such notice was proved to have been issued. be that as it may it is clear that abatement under section does not depend upon the issuance or non -issuance of any notice under section as amended. this being the case the finding of fact of non -issuance of notice itself being a non -issue it is unnecessary for us to pursue the same. it is only necessary to reiterate that no fresh exercise under the amendment act was undertaken by the prescribed authority as is required by section of the amendment act. this being the case the impugned judgment of the high court has necessarily to be set aside. the appeal is therefore allowed with no order as to costs.