p. venkatarama reddi j.these appeals by special leave preferred by the union of india are directed against the common judgment of the bombay high court in a batch of writ petitions filed under article of the constitution by the manufacturers / importers of certain bulk drugs and their formulations. the bulk drugs concerned are in number. they are salbutamol theophylline cyproflaxacin norfloxacin $$$ $$$ and glipizide. these bulk drugs and the formulations made out of them are sold within the country and part of the quantities produced are also exported outside the country. the challenge is to the inclusion of the said bulk drugs in the schedule to the drugs price control order hereinafter referred to as the dpco. though the fixation of priced pursuant to the provisions of the said order was also challenged in some of the writ petitions that issue was not g into by the high court and at any rate the mechanics of price fixation is not the contentious issue before us. however it may be noted that the remedy by way of review is available under paragraph of the dpco to seek reconsideration of price fixation. the immediate provocation for filing the writ petitions in the high court seems to be the notices issued by the national pharmaceutical pricing authority calling upon some of the national pharmaceutical pricing authority calling upon some of the respondent -companies to deposit the overcharged amounts in relation to the formulations of scheduled drugs.the high court held that the concerned drugs should not have been brought within the purview of the dpco and consequently there could be no fixation of price in relation to those drugs. the notices demanding overcharged amounts were quashed. the writ petitions were thus allowed by the division bench of high court.the dpco which came into force on january was promulgated by the central government in exercise of the powers conferred by section of the essential commodities act. it repealed the earlier dpco of under which more number of drugs were subjected to price control. drug as defined in drugs & cosmetics act is of the essential commodities.according to section of dpco bulk drug means any pharmaceutical chemical biological or plant product including its salts esters stereo -isomers and derivatives conforming to pharmacopoeia or other standards specified in the second schedule to the drugs and cosmetics act and which is used as such or as an ingredient in any formulation. formulation is defined to mean a medicine processed out of or containing of more bulk drug or drugs with or without the use of any pharmaceutical aids for internal or external use in the diagnosis treatment mitigation or prevention of disease in human beings or animals.paragraph of dpco empowers the central government to fix from time to time a maximum sale price at which the bulk drug specified in the schedule shall be sold after making such inquiry as it deems fit. the opening clause of sub -para spells out the avowed purpose of price control on the scheduled bulk drugs. the declared objective is to regulate the equitable distribution and increasing supplies of the specified bulk drug and making them available at a fair price. there is a prohibition against the sale of bulk drug at a price exceeding the maximum sale price fixed under sub -paragraph plus local taxes if any. as already observed we are not concerned here with the modalities of fixation of price. the very inclusion of these bulk drugs in the schedule is being assailed on the ground that it is opposed to the norms laid down by the central government itself in the drug policy of and therefore the delegated legislative power exercised by the government is arbitrary and violative of article of the constitution. the plea of the respondents was accepted by the high court.in the drug policy document issued on september the central government noticed that during $$$$ the drug industry had grown significantly in terms of production of bulk drugs and formulations and the export performance of the industry had been commendable. it was said that the pharmaceutical sector had been able to carve a special niche for itself in the international market as a dependable exporter of bulk drugs. the drug policy with regard to pricing has been stated thus in paragraph of the policy paper:". pricing the aberrations which have come to notice in the listing of drugs and their categorization for the purpose of price control need to be eliminated by the use of transparent criteria applied across the board on all the drugs with the minimum use of subjectively. the high turnover of a drug is in index of its extent of usage and is considered to meet the requirements of objectivity justifiable on economic considerations. however the monopoly situation in cases of drugs with comparatively lower turnover has also to be kept in view. also as an experimental measure drugs having adequate competition may not be kept under price control and if this proves successful it would pave the way for further liberalization. in the event however of prices of these drugs not remaining within reasonable limits the government would reclaim price control.in paragraph it is stated--"in the light of the apprehensions expressed in the parliament on the likely spurt in the pieces of medicines it has benefit that it would not be desirable to allow automatically in the pricing mechanism. the government would set up an independent body of experts to be called the national pharmaceutical pricing authority to do the work of price fixation. this expert body would also be entrusted with the task of updating the list of drugs under price control $$$$ on the basis of the established criteria / guidelines...the government 's resolve to closely monitor the trends of prices of medicines and to take appropriate measures to reclaim price control in case the prices of such medicines rise unreasonably has been stressed in paragraph. then we come to the most important paragraph in the drug policy i..which bears the heading span of control. it sets out the criteria for bringing the drugs under price control. we quote paragraph... span of control--(i the criteria of including drugs under price control would be the minimum $$$$ turnover of rs. lakhs.drugs of popular use in which there is a monopoly situation be kept under price control. for this purpose for any bulk drug having an $$$$ turnover of rs. lakhs or more there is a single formulator having % or more market share in the retail trade as per org a monopoly situation would be considered as existing.drugs in which there is sufficient market competition viz.at least bulk drug producers and at least formulators and n having more than the % market share in the retail trade as per org may be kept outside the price control. however a strict watch would be kept on the movement of prices as it is expected that their prices would be kept in check by the forces of market competition. the government may determine the ceiling levels beyond which increase in prices would not be permissible.government will keep a close watch on the prices of medicines which are taken out of price control. in case the prices of these medicines rise unreasonably the government would take appropriate measures including reclaim of price control.for applying the above criteria to start with the basis would be the data upto st march collected for the exercise of the review of the drug policy. the updating of the data will be d by the national pharmaceutical pricing authority as detailed in para.. the central theme of the arguments is that the norms set out in sub -$$$ i & have not been adhered to by the government while framing the schedule to dpco in purported implementation of the drug policy. there was either deviation from the criteria set out or there was no scientific or rational assessment of the factors relevant to the norms. most of the arguments centered round the interpretation of the clauses in para.--an exercise which is usually associated with the construction of statutes. the sum and substance of the arguments on behalf of the respondents is that the bulk drugs get excluded from the span of control under or more norms spelt out in para.whereas the stand of the appellants is that the concerned bulk drugs were included in the schedule only after being satisfied that they came within the ambit of price control criteria. it is also the contention of the appellant that the government 's decision to bring these important bulk drugs within price control is in accordance with the objectives underlying in section of the essential commodities act particularly the interests of consumers. every attempt was made to examine the facts and figures by an expert group of the standing committee keeping in view the prescribed norms in drug policy. it is pointed out that the high court can not go into the intricacies of price fixation under article of the constitution or sit in judgment over the exercise d by experts.it is axiomatic that the contents of a policy documents can not be read and interpreted as statutory provisions. too much of legalism can not be imported in understanding the scope and meaning of the clauses contained in policy formulations. at the same time the central government which combines the dual role of policy -maker and the delegate of legislative power can not at its sweet will and pleasure give a go -bye to the policy guidelines evolved by itself in the matter of selection of drugs for price control. the government itself stressed the need to evolve and adopt transparent criteria to be applied across the board so as to minimize the scope for subjective approach and therefore came forward with specific criteria. it is nobody 's case that for any good reasons the policy or norms have been changed or became impracticable of compliance. that being the case the government exercising its delegated legislative power should make a real and earnest attempt to apply the criteria laid down by itself. the delegated legislation that follows the policy formulation should be broadly and substantially in conformity with that policy otherwise it would be vulnerable to attack on the ground of arbitrariness resulting in violation of article.in indian express newspapers v. union of india the grounds on which subordinate legislation can be questid were outlined by this court. e.s. $$$ j. observed thus:"a piece of subordinate legislation does not carry the same degree of immunity which is enjoyed by a statute passed by a competent legislature. subordinate legislation may be questid on any of the ground on which plenary legislation is questid. in addition it may also be questid on the ground that it does not conform to the statute under which it is made.it may also be questid on the ground that it is unreasonable unreasonable not in the sense of not being reasonable but in the sense that it is manifestly arbitrary. in england the judges would say parliament never intended authority to make such rules. they are unreasonable and ultra vires.true the breach of policy decision by itself is not a ground to invalidate delegated legislation. but in a case like this the inevitable fallout of the breach of policy decision which the government itself treated as a charter for the resultant legislation is to leave an imprint of arbitrariness on the legislation. when the selection or classification of certain drugs is involved for the purpose of price control such selection or classification should be on rational basis and can not be strikingly arbitrary. no doubt in such matters wide latitude is conceded to the legislature or its delegate. broadly the subordinate law -making authority is guided by the policy and objectives of primary legislation disclosed by preamble and other provisions. the delegated legislation need not be modelled on a set pattern or pre -fixed guidelines. however where the delegate goes a step further draws up and announces a rational policy in keeping with the purposes of enabling legislation and even lays down specific criteria to promote the policy the criteria so evolved become the guide -posts for its legislative action. in that sense its freedom of classification will be regulated by the self -evolved criteria and there should be demonstrable justification for deviating therefrom. though exactitude and meticulous conformance is not what is required it is not open to the government to go hay -wire and flout or debilitate the set norms either by giving distorted meaning to them or by disregarding the very facts and factors which it professed to take into account in the interest of transparency and objectivity. otherwise the legislative act of the delegate in choosing some drugs for price control while leaving others will attract the wrath of article. that is why the union of india has taken the stand throughout that it stood by the policy while framing the legislation and that there was every endeavour to apply the criteria spelt out in the drug policy of before including the drugs in question in the schedule. the correctness of this contention should of course be examined.with this prologue let us proceed to analyze the relevant criteria in the drug policy. according to the criteria for bringing the drugs under the price control the minimum $$$$ turnover of the drug should be lacs. however this requirement is qualified by and subject to the criteria laid down in ii & iii. where a monopoly situation prevails in respect of any bulk drug the minimum $$$$ turnover requirement gets reduced to lacs. the monopoly situation is deemed to exist where there is a single formulator commanding % or more market share in the retail trade as per org data. according to the criterion even if minimum $$$$ turnover exceeds lacs the drug will be kept outside price control in case there is sufficient market competition. the yardstick rhea assessing whether there is sufficient market competition according to $$$ iii is that there are at least producers of the particular bulk drug and at least formulators and n of them have more than % market share in the retail trade as per org data.the said criteria have to be worked out with reference to the data available upto st march which means the relevant facts and figures relating to financial year -have to be taken into account. this is not in dispute.already noted there is no quarrel about the criteria that has been laid down. it is not the case of the union of india that any different criteria had been applied while promulgating the dpco of. the controversy revolves round its actual application or methodology of working out the criteria. what is the $$$$ turnover made up of in other words how to work out the turnover figures is there sufficient market competition as contemplated by $$$ iii it is with reference to these aspects that the government 's stand has not been accepted and the writ petitir 's contention found its acceptance by the high court. we shall take up the issue of $$$$ turnover. the stand of the appellant as discernible from the affidavits on record sworn to by the officials of the department of chemicals and petrochemicals government of india is that the turnover of bulk drug ought not to be mixed up with retail sale data of the formulations of that bulk drug in other words the retail sale data pertains to formulations of bulk drug and not to the bulk drug itself. the broad manner in which the turnover has been assessed is indicated in paragraph of the rejoinder affidavit filed in slps. it is stated that the expert group of the standing committee which went into the whole issue of exclusion / inclusion of drugs under price control took the date for turnover of the bulk drugs comprising of the value of its total production in the country and value of wed average of landed cost of total imports into the country as the basis for viewing the price scenario from different points of view. it is then stated in paragraph -in the further respectful submission of the petitir the intent behind using the said word turnover has been to determine the extent of usage of a bulk drug in the country emphasis supplied. this was the measure adopted by the expert group in case of each bulk drug by taking into account the aggregate of its total imports into the country and its total indigenous production in the country. this has been the connotation of the word turnover at various levels throughout the deliberations and in implementation of the policy through dpco and was never confined to the narrow connotation of the word ' sales turnover. in short it is submitted vide paragraph that the value of total production plus imports of the bulk drug in the country determines the $$$$ turnover for the purpose of $$$ i & of para.. as a corollary to this stand the contention advanced on behalf of the union of india is that export sales could also be taken into account in arriving at the $$$$ turnover. according to the respondents writ petitirs the $$$$ turnover could only mean sales of bulk drug within the country either in the same form or by way of formulations and it has nothing to do with export sales. the entirety of production and imports can not be regarded as turnover. it is submitted by the respondents that the bulk drugs are sold mostly in the form of formulations and the quantities of bulk drugs utilized in such formulations are given in org data. from this the bulk drug turnover can be easily ascertained. the sales of the bulk drugs as such to the institutions etc.will be negligible i.about % as per the certificate issued by org in of the cases. it is therefore commented that the contention that the org data does not afford the basis for ascertaining the $$$$ turnover of the bulk drug is untenable.the high court substantially agreeing with the contentions of the respondents writ petitirs held that the expression turnover occurring in drugs policy can only mean domestic sales figures and nothing else. export sales can not be included within the ambit of turnover. the high court observed that the concepts of turnover and market share are interrelated and inter -dependent. the expression turnover if interpreted in a contextual and purposive manner would not include exports. the extent of usage of the bulk drug in the country would be determinative of turnover. by taking the export sale figures and the value of entire production of bulk drugs into account the central government had acted contrary to its own guidelines contained in drug policy. the high court then proceeded to discuss whether each of the drugs concerned could be brought within the purview of dcpo and answered that question in favour of the writ petitirs.before proceeding further we may notice that the national pharmaceutical pricing authority nppa constituted by the government of india considered the representation of bulk drugs manufacturers association $$$ on the subject of inclusion / exclusion of drugs under dpco. the nppa passed a reasd order rejected the representation on dt.. in that order the issues raised by $$$ regarding exclusion of out of drugs with which we are concerned were considered by the said authority. there was however no consideration as regards drugs namely $$$ and glipizide probably because the representation did not cover those drugs.before we take up the issue of export sales it is necessary to understand the true import and expanse of the expression turnover occurring in $$$ i of para.of the drug policy. what is the turnover contemplated by the said paragraph can it be equated to the value of imported bulk drug and its production as contended by the appellant or should it be equated to the actual sales within the country should the export sales be included in turnover these are the questions to which this court has to address itself.turnover in its ordinary sense connotes amount of business usually expressed in terms of gross revenue transacted during a specified period vide $$$. broadly speaking it represents the value of the goods or services sold or supplied during a period of time. the amount of my turned over or drawn in a business during certain period is another shade of meaning. we need not refer to the definition of turnover in sales tax and other fiscal enactments reliance on which was placed by some of the learned counsel as they are not quite relevant for the purpose of understanding the expression turnover occurring in a policy document. nor should we seek any assistance from the definition of sale turnover occurring in dpco in a different context and for a different purpose. going by its ordinary meaning and the way in which it is commonly understood in trade and commerce it is difficult to equate turnover to the value of stock acquired either by means of imports or production. for instance the entire stock in trade say lying in a godown and not circulated in business can not be regarded as turnover even giving broadest meaning to the expression turnover. the reasoning which could be spelt out from the order passed by nppa referred to supra and in the counter affidavits filed by the appellants that indigenous production plus imports furnishes an indicia of the total business in the country in relation to a particular bulk drug can not be accepted. it is only what is sold out and marketed that could be legitimately regarded as turnover of the specified drug. it may be that in the absence of availability of reliable data regarding sales the import value and production value could be the basis to estimate the sale value after giving due allowance to various factors such as wastage unsold stocks etc. but treating the turnover as nothing but the value of stock produced or imported during $$$$ will be doing violence to the ordinarily accepted meaning of the expression turnover. there can be no presumption that the entire stock of bulk drug produced or imported during $$$$ had been sold out during $$$$ either in the form of formulations or otherwise. however we would like to make it clear that the production and import statistics are not altogether irrelevant. they are relevant in the sense that they furnish some basis for estimating the sales when there is no other reliable and comprehensive data of sales available.the question whether export sales should also be taken into account in computing the $$$$ turnover needs to be discussed now. there can be no doubt that the meaning of the expression turnover either in its ordinary or legal sense includes export sales. but we must have regard to the terms and objectives of the policy and try to understand that expression accordingly. para of the drug policy makes it clear that the high turnover of a drug is an index of its extent of usage. usage has obvious reference to consumption and consumption within the domestic market. whether the drug is extensively used within the country is of the considerations kept in view to clamp price control. the export potential of the drug or its usage in foreign countries could not have been the reason to notify the specified drugs for price control. if there is any doubt in this regard it is dispelled by what is stated in paragraph of the rejoinder affidavit which we quoted supra. to repeat it was stated therein that the intent behind using the word turnover has been to determine the extent of usage of a bulk drug in the country. it is also pertinent to note that the govt. of india has not come forward with any explanation as to why export sales also should be taken into account in assessing the turnover as per the criteria laid down in the drug policy. for all these reasons we are in agreement with the high court that the export sales ought to have been excluded while calculating the turnover. how far the exclusion of export sales would make any difference is a different matter.another grey area which has surfaced in the backdrop of the drug policy is whether for the purpose of $$$ iii the expression formulators should be confined to single ingredient formulators or it should extend to multi -ingredient formulators as well. the nppa while rejecting the representation of the bulk drug manufacturers ' association referred to the clarification issued by the government of india in its communication dated.addressed to of the writ petitirs which is as follows:"the basis of the single ingredient formulation as against that of the combination formulation for purpose of calculating market share is not only justified on account of predominance of single ingredient formulation on over all basis but also vindicates the objective of promoting the rational use of drugs in the country mentid in paragraph of the modifications in drug policy. the principle of covering only single ingredient formulations for purposes of calculating market share is a transparent objective and verifiable principle and hence suitable for policy issues. formulations of a bulk drug containing or more other bulk drug are not comparable in terms of their sales values. therefore it is practically not possible to apply the criteria relating to market share of a formulator of a bulk drug on the basis of data of its combination formulations across the board in a transparent objective and verifiable manner as required for policy issues.it is therefore contended by the union of india that only single ingredient formulations have to be taken into account for the purpose of working out the criterion in $$$ iii and that the number of single ingredient formulators of the concerned bulk drug is not discernible from org data. of course it is the contention of the respondents that no such distinction can be drawn. it is contended that such distinction is irrational.in our view the clarification given by the government of india reflects a reasonable view point and it can not be said that by adopting such approach a distorted meaning is given to the expression formulator much against the spirit of the policy. at any rate views are possible and it is not for the court to decide which view is preferable. before closing the discussion on the controversies surrounding the criteria evolved in the drug policy there is argument of the learned solicitor general which we would like to refer to. the learned solicitor general argued that the expression may occurring in $$$ iii of para.of the drug policy confers discretion and flexibility in approach to the government of india. even if a particular bulk drug stands outside price control by the application of such criteria the discretion is still left to the government to include the drug in the schedule for good reasons. this argument can not be countenanced for the simple reason that it is not the case of the government that for any particular reason or reasons the bulk drug concerned was brought within the purview of price control though the drug qualifies for exclusion under $$$ iii. even assuming that the discretion is available in terms of the policy the factum of exercising such discretion for relevant reasons should be disclosed. in the absence of such disclosure the court must proceed on the basis that the government stood by the criteria and saw no need to deviate therefrom.now it is necessary to advert to the nature of the claim made by the writ petitirs in relation to each of the bulk drugs the stand taken by the union of india and the conclusions of the high court.salbutamol according to the writ petitir -company the $$$$ turnover for $$$$ ending march was rs.lacs based on the org data. the sales of formulations in domestic market has been taken as the basis to calculate the consumption. it is then multiplied by the notified price prevalent during the relevant period. it is the further case of the writ petitir that there was as many as formulations including the petitir n of whom had the market share of more than %. admittedly there were more than bulk drug producers. the writ petitir -company therefore claimed the benefit of exclusion both under $$$ i and iii of para.of the drug policy. the government of india took the stand that the bulk drug turnover was rs.crores based on the value of domestic production and imports. moreover there were only known formulators of the bulk drug. therefore it is contended that the drug salbutamol does not qualify for exclusion either under $$$ i or iii. the high court accepted the claim of the petitir -company on the ground that in the counter affidavit filed by the union of india there was only a bald denial and the details given by the writ petitirs were not controverted.theophylline the writ petitirs claimed exclusion under $$$ iii. the names of bulk drug producers and formulators were given in the writ petition. in the counter affidavit it was merely stated that there were less than known manufacturers of bulk drug and less than known formulators of the bulk drug and therefore the drug. theophylline did not qualify for exclusion under $$$ iii. the high court observed that the particulars furnished by the petitir were not effectively controverted there being only a bald denial. it was therefore held that the drug ought not to have been brought under price control.as per the statement furnished by the learned solicitor general at the time of hearing the fact that there were more than bulk drug producers was accepted but the number of formulators was given as. therefore the dispute is confined to the number of formulators the term formulator being understood in the sense in which the government of india explained in its clarificatory letter dated --.cloxacillin the writ petitirs concerned are said to be the manufacturers of formulations made out of cloxacillin. there is no dispute that the $$$$ turnover at the relevant time was much more than lacs. the writ petitirs claimed exclusion of the drug cloxacillin on the basis of $$$ iii of para.. according to them there were as many as bulk drug procedures and formulators in respect of cloxacillin and n of the formulators had more than % market share as per the org figures for $$$$ -upto march. the high court accepted the case of the petitirs on the ground that the factual particulars were not controverted but there was only a bald denial in the counter affidavit filed by union of india. the counter affidavit of union of india is not found either in s.l.p. paper books or the original record of high court. however the stand of union of india as is clear from the reply dated.of the nppa sent to the bulk drug manufacturers ' association as well as the grounds of slp is that the number of single ingredient formulators of the drug was less than. according to the statement furnished by the learned solicitor general in the course of the arguments the number of formulators were only. the nppa clarified the position thus:"the association has claimed that the highest market share of single formulator is.%. this claim is based on consideration of sale values of both single ingredient and combination products of cloxacillin. however the highest market share of single drug ingredient formulation of a particular formulator works out to.% which is more than the stipulated level of %.thus there is controversy regarding the number of formulators and their market share.cyproflaxacin the nd petitir in writ petition no. of namely ranbaxy laboratories ltd. produced the said bulk drug during the relevant period and captivity consumed the same in the manufacture of formulations marketed under the brand name of cifran both in india and foreign countries. the petitir in w.p.no. of is $$$. inter alia it is engaged in the manufacture and sale of formulations of the drug cyproflaxacin. according to ranbaxy ltd.the $$$$ domestic turnover of the drug for $$$$ ending march was rs. lacs and according to the cipla ltd.it was rs. lacs excluding the hospital and institutional sales to the extent of %. it is therefore contended that the drug stands excluded under $$$ i of para.of the drugs policy. it is their further contention that there was no monopoly situation as contemplated by $$$ ii inasmuch as there was no single formulator having % or more market share in the retail trade as per org data. the said turnover was calculated on the basis of estimated consumption purportedly arrived at with reference to the data relating to sales formulations given in org publication. the quantum of consumption was then multiplied by the then prevailing market price. however a different method of calculation of turnover was spelt out in the representation dated.submitted by ranbaxy ltd.to government of india vide ext.b in w.p.no. of. according to that calculation the turnover is rs. lacs.in the counter affidavit the turnover given by the writ petitirs has been disputed. it is stated that org data relates to formulation sales and it does not give data in regard to quantities and values of bulk drugs involved. it was also stated that cyproflaxacin was included in the schedule on the basis of criterion in $$$ i since the turnover in -was taken as rs. lacs based on the landed cost of imports of the drug. it is then stated that the data in regard to indigenous production is not available.the high court merely referred to the contention of the writ petitirs regarding the turnover and accepted the same on the ground that there was only bald denial in the affidavit in reply. surprisingly the high court extended the benefit of exclusion under $$$ iii also though it was never the case of the writ petitirs. the high court stated that there were admittedly bulk drug procedures and formulators though no such case was set up by either of the writ petitirs. in the org data furnished by the petitir in w.p.no. of and in the representation submitted to the government of india only the names of formulators was mentid. thus there was an obvious error in the high court 's judgment. the plea of discrimination which was raised for the time in the rejoinder affidavit filed in w.p.no. of also found favour with the high court.norfloxacin the writ petitir seeks exclusion from the purview of dpco on the basis of $$$ iii of para.of the drugs policy. it is the case of the petitir that there were at least bulk drug manufacturers and formulators and no single formulator had more than % market share as per the org figures. the names were given in the writ petition. however the stand taken in the counter affidavit filed by the government of india is that there were only manufacturers of the bulk drug and the org data does not disclose the number of bulk drug producers. as regards the formulators the stand taken is that the number of single ingredient formulators using the said bulk drug is not discernible from the org data. it is therefore contended that the twin conditions of a minimum of bulk drug producers and at least formulators are not satisfied. the high court accepted the plea of the writ petition on the ground that there was only a bald denial in the counter affidavit and no specific particulars were given to controvert the contention of the petitir. in the order passed by nppa in response to the representation of bulk drug manufacturers ' association it is stated that as per the records available there were only bulk drug manufacturers in the country during -. however the names were not furnished either in this document or the counter affidavit.as per the org data the market share of the formulation sold by the petitir -company was.% vide annexure at page of the original writ petition record which as pointed out by nppa is technically lower than %. we may add that it is perilously close to %. it should also be noted that the writ petitir did not furnish any details of production to show that the bulk drug manufacturers mentid by it or at least amongst them actually produced the bulk drug.$$$ it is the case of the writ petitir that it manufacture and sells single ingredient formulation containing the bulk drug $$$ in a concentration of mg per capsule under the brand name of doxy-. the $$$$ turnover of the bulk drug $$$ according to the writ petitir was rs. lacs. it is seen from the tabular statement appended to annexure -a to the writ petition at pages -of the original record the petitir arrived at the total domestic consumption of the bulk drug with reference to the org data pertaining to sales of formulations in the market. it is the further case of the writ petitir that as per org data there were at least formulators producing $$$ based formulations and n of them had more than % of market share in retail trade. therefore the petitir claimed that the bulk drug $$$ should have been excluded from the purview of price control in terms of under $$$ i & iii and that monopoly situation contemplated by $$$ ii has no application because no single manufacturer had % or more market share in retail trade.the stand of the government has been that the turnover of $$$ was above lacs during the relevant period and therefore it comes under price control. further it is their case that $$$ ii has no application because the turnover is above lacs. it is also averred in the counter affidavit that the retail trade sale data is not relevant since the need to calculate market share does not arise. moreover since undisputably there is only manufacturer of the bulk drug i.ranbaxy limited the exclusion criteria laid down in $$$ iii of para.is not applicable.in paragraph of the judgment under appeal the high court having merely referred to the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitir accepted the case of the petitir on the ground that in the affidavit -in -reply filed by the government there was only bald denial and that the particulars were not controverted. moreover the high court was under an apparent misapprehension that $$$ sought the benefit of exclusion under $$$ iii also. the core controversy as already noticed is regarding the quantum of turnover. the union of india took the stand that the turnover was above lacs. in the statement filed by the learned solicitor -general at the time of argument the figure was given as.lacs. however the appellant did not furnish any details as to the calculation of turnover.glipizide the writ petitir usv limited is a manufacture of the bulk drug glipizide which is sold under the brand name of glynase. it does not appear that there was any other producer of bulk drug during the relevant period. it is the case of the writ petitir that the $$$$ turnover for $$$$ ending st march was only rs. lacs and that clause ii is not therefore attracted. the writ petitir estimated the turnover figure by arriving at the consumption of the bulk drug in various formulations and by multiplying the same by the mrp maximum retail price. the org data relating to sales of formulations was furnished.the stand of the central government is that production data was not available for $$$$ -and the turnover of the bulk drug was determined by the expert group on the basis of the landed cost of imports during $$$$ to the tune of rs.lacs. as there was only formulator as reported in org survey of march monopoly situation was considered to be existing since formulator was having % market share as on.. disputing the assertion of the writ petitir that as per org data furnished in ext.f to the writ petition there was no single formulator having % or more market share in retail trade it is pointed out in paragraph iv of the counter affidavit that ext.f includes formulations based on the bulk drugs other than glipizide. it is further stated in the same para of the counter that there is only formulation namely glynase based on glipizide and in respect of that the writ petitir had % market share.thus the dispute mainly centers round the quantum of turnover.the high court observed that even assuming that the petitirs were the sole manufacturers of the said drug as the turnover was below rs. lacs the monopoly situation as envisaged in para.ii of drug policy does not apply and as such the said drug ought to be kept out of the purview of dpco. the plea of discrimination between this drug and another anti -diabetic drug known as $$$ also found favour with the high court.we are of the view that the approach of high court in considering the question of applicability of criteria laid down in the drugs policy in relation to each of the above drugs is not correct and the high court failed to address itself to various crucial aspects as indicated below:.org data does not give full and clear picture of the turnover of bulk drug. org data relates to sales of formulations made either exclusively out of the bulk drug or in combination with other drugs. the formulations containing the particular bulk drug either wholly or in part reach the consumers through normal trade channels. the particulars of sales of such formulations entering the retail market are compiled by org. bulk drug sales as such are not covered by org data. at best from org data it may be possible to deduce the consumption of bulk drug on estimated basis especially if it is the only drug used in that formulation. moreover direct sales to institutions such as hospitals and government organizations are not reflected in org compilation. according to the certificate filed in some of the cases such sales would be about %. it is also borne out by the same certificate issued by the associate research director of org ext. c to w.p.no. of and annexure -i to written submissions that out of this % the org data covers about % of the retail market sales. this is what the certificate says:--"the retail pharma market in india contributes to % of the total market and the remaining % towards hospital and institutional sales.i would like to confirm that out of this % of retail pharma market org -marg covers around % through the retail store audit rsa.more aspect which deserves notice is that from the org data it may not be possible to ascertain whether the formulation is made up of single ingredient of the bulk drug or it has multi -ingredients. we have held that the government of india 's view that single ingredient formulators al should be taken into account for the purpose of the criteria in clause iii of para.of drugs policy can not be said to be against the policy or otherwise unreasonable.sales of bulk drugs effected during $$$$ by bulk drug producers including some of the respondents herein would have furnished the best indicia of domestic sale turnover of bulk drug. but those details were not disclosed. secondly if the bulk drug produced was consumed by any bulk drug producer or importer and the drug was sold in the form of formulations the satisfies regarding the quantum of bulk drug utilized in such formulations and the value thereof must have been within the knowledge or reach of writ petitirs and there is no good reason why they should withhold all this relevant information and harp on org data. there is no need to resort to guesswork when the actual figures are available at the doorsteps of the respondents. moreover some of the respondents have arrived at the estimates by varying methods without reference to actual data available with them. for instance in the case of the drug cyproflaxacin we have adverted to different methods of calculation given by the writ petitirs which yield different results. if we go by the estimates of turnover made by the respondents there is vast difference between the value of the bulk drug worked out by them and the sale value of formulations. moreover in relation to some of the drugs there is vast variation between the quantity produced and imported and the quantity said to have been utilized in formulations sold in the market. these factors should have put the high court on guard to subject the petitirs ' version to close and critical scrutiny.when the burden was on the writ petitirs to substantiate their plea of violation of article and when the plea predominantly rested on facts and figures the high court should have examined the intrinsic worth and credibility of the version put forward with regard to the turnover figures. the high court oversimplified the whole issue by addressing itself to the only question whether there was effective rebuttal of the averments by the union of india. the callousness on the part of the officials concerned in not meeting the points raised squarely and leaving the scope for ambiguity should not in our view be a ground to accept whatever is falling rom the writ petitirs. the material placed before the court should have been critically examined before reaching a conclusion that article is violated. the high court should have also examined whether the writ petitirs withheld the relevant data which they were in a position to produce and if so what would be its effect. n of these aspects received attention of the high court. before striking down the legislation the high court should have realized that those who challenged the legislation should lay firm factual foundation in support of their plea. the complaint of violation of norms set out in the policy leading to the alleged infraction of article depends in the ultimate analysis on facts and figures. as already observed org data is neither comprehensive nor conclusive and moreover in regard to some of the drugs the data does not in unequivocal terms support the case of the writ petitirs. in such a situation further probe and analysis was required which the high court failed to do. the version of writ petitirs regarding the quantum of turnover was accepted to be correct on its face value. that apart in the light of the clarification given by us that single ingredient formulators al could be legitimately taken into account in the context of clause iii the need for reconsideration by the high court becomes inevitable. we are therefore of the view that the crucial issues regarding the applicability of criteria laid down in para.of the drugs policy require reconsideration by the high court from various angles indicated supra in the light of the legal position enunciated and the observations made in this judgment.we have broadly indicated the aspects on which the high court could have focused its attention before the reaching the conclusion it did. nothing precludes the high court from having regard to other aspects or material which it considers relevant to test the correctness of the writ petitirs ' claims. however we would like to clarify thing. if on reconsideration the turnover of any drug is found to be very close to the figure--00 or lacs as the case may be the relevant criterion must be deemed to have been satisfied. as we said earlier mathematical accuracy is not what is required.there is more point which we have to deal with i.the alleged discrimination between drug and another. the high court upheld such plea raised in rejoinder affidavit in relation to the drugs ' cyproflaxacin and glipizide. we unhesitatingly vacate the findings of the high court in this regard because we are of the view that the reasons given by the high court for upholding such plea are too tenuous to merit even prima facie acceptance.in the case of cyproflaxacin in w.p.no. of it was contended that bulk drugs namely $$$ and amikacin sulphate were wrongly and arbitrarily deleted from the dpco. it is difficult to comprehend as to how there could be infraction of article merely because a few bulk drugs were excluded from the purview of dpco on a reconsideration. the exclusion of some drugs even if such exclusion is unjustified can not be a ground to claim exclusion of other drugs on the so called principle of parity. logically if the high court 's view has to be accepted the entire schedule should be invalidated for the simple reason that or drugs which were not eligible for exclusion in the light of the policy guidelines were excluded. it would then lead to a starting result frustrating the very objective of regulating the price of essential drugs. that apart the turnover figures of the said drugs furnished by the writ petitioner and referred to by the high court do not established that they fall within the policy guidelines. regarding mefenamic acid what all is stated in paragraph of the rejoinder affidavit is that the turnover of this drug has been over rs. crores between -to -and yet it was excluded for reasons not known to the petitioners. nothing has been stated as to how the turnover for $$$$ was arrived at. no information was furnished regarding the number of bulk drug producers and formulators and their market share. evidently the petitioner made only a halfhearted attempt to put forward a plea of discrimination but it succeeded in its attempt. coming to the other drug amikacin sulphate even according to the petitioner the import value of the drug in -was rs.crores which is much below the limit of rs. crores and even if there was a single formulator having a market share in excess of % that does not make any difference. that apart the government of india clarified in of the counter affidavits filed in the high court that on the scrutiny and verification of details submitted by the manufacturers these drugs were subsequently deleted from the first schedule having regard to the criteria laid down in the policy.we have therefore no hesitation in reversing the conclusion of the high court that the exclusion of the said drugs from dpco amounted to hostile discrimination.regarding glipizide the plea of discrimination between this drug and another anti -diabetic drug known as $$$ found favour with the high court. the high court in paragraph of the judgment referred to the argument that $$$ having lacs turnover as on 1st march was included in dpco of but subsequently excluded from price control and held that there was discrimination on that account. the high court evidently proceeded on an erroneous assumption that $$$ was excluded from the schedule. the averments in paragraph of the writ petition no. are otherwise. the plea of discrimination was aimed at the drug known as glibelclamide which was excluded from the dpco of and continued to remain excluded from the dpco of. the respondent did not even aver that the said drug had the turnover of more than lacs and therefore it would fall within the mischief of clause ii. on the basis of a bald plea the infraction of article ought not to have been countenanced. the finding of the high court in this regard is palpably wrong. we now summarize the conclusions as under:1. where the central government as the delegate of legislative power announces a rational policy in keeping with the purposes of enabling legislation and even lays down specific criteria to promote the policy the criteria so evolved become the guide -posts of its legislative action. while classifying the drugs for the purpose of price control it is not open to the government to flout or debilitate the set norms which it professed to follow in the interest of transparency and objectivity. otherwise there will be an element of arbitrariness and the delegated legislation will not withstand the test of article. the expression turnover in drug policy represents the sale value of bulk drug sold as such or in the form of formulations. export sales should not be taken into account while computing turnover. the sum total of production and imports of bulk drug can not be equated to turnover though they are not altogether irrelevant in calculating the turnover. org data does not give exhaustive account of turn over of bulk drug. it may furnish the basis for estimating the turnover but is not the sole guide. for the purpose of criterion no. iii of the drug policy the single ingredient formulators alone ought to be taken into account as clarified by the govt. of india. burden lies on those who challenge the legislation on the ground of violation of article to make out their case by furnishing all the relevant material which is within their reach and knowledge. there should be frank disclosure of material facts more so when the plea is founded on certain factual aspects. the mere vagueness or lack of clarity in the stand taken by the union of india does not by itself advance the case of the writ petitioners. the plea of writ petitioners ought to have been tested and subjected to scrutiny in the light of all relevant factors instead of merely considering whether the particulars furnished by the petitioners were effectively controverted or not. such an approach of the high court is wholly impermissible while deciding the validity of legislation plenary or delegated from the stand point of article. the plea of discrimination between drug and another is unfounded and should not have been accepted by the high court. in the result the judgment of the high court is set aside and the writ petitions out of which these appeals arise shall stand restored to the file of the high court and the high court will have to consider afresh the relevant aspects concerning the criteria laid down in para.of the drug policy in relation to each drug having due regard to the observations made in the judgment. the high court may endeavour to expedite hearing of the writ petitions. the appeals are accordingly allowed without costs. we also consider it just and proper to give liberty to the appellant and the concerned statutory authorities to recover % of the over charged amounts pending fresh determination by the high court. accordingly we direct stay of recovery of % of the overcharged amount subject to the payment of remaining % within the period of weeks from the date of communication of the amount payable by each of the writ petitioners.