n. $$$ j. in regard to an incident which took place on.at about.p. in village jangal police station pathankot a complaint was lodged against accused persons which was recorded by $$$ and on completion of the said investigation he filed a chargesheet only against nachhattar singh a- prem singh a- and sukhdev singh a-. during the course of the trial the learned sessions judge found sufficient material to proceed under section of cr.p.c. against the other accused namely $$$. $$$ a- and $$$ and having included them in the array of accused persons he tried all the for the offence punishable under sections read with section ipc. in appeal before the high court of punjab & haryana at chandigarh the high court allowed the appeal of of the accused persons namely a- to a- and confirmed the conviction and sentence imposed on the other appellants i. a- to a-. out of the accused persons convicted by the high court a- has not preferred any appeal and only a- and a- are before us in this appeal. the prosecution case stated briefly is that in view of some previous enmity arising out of the fact that prem singh a- had called the sons of deceased $$$ as bhangi and drunkards there was some altercation $$$$ between the groups belonging to a- and the deceased $$$. it is pursuant to the abovesaid incident on.at about.p. when deceased $$$ and his daughter smt. raj karni pw- were coming towards their house from their cattle shed in front of the house of $$$ a- a- intercepted the deceased armed with an axe along with $$$ was holding a takua $$$ a- armed with a kirpan $$$ armed with a dang $$$ and $$$ who were unarmed. it is the prosecution case that all these persons attacked the deceased and pw- during which attack a- gave a kulhari blow on the head of deceased $$$ consequent to which the deceased fell down still a- continued to inflict more blows on the fallen body of the deceased. at that time when pw- raised an alarm hearing which kashmir singh came to the spot and he was also attacked by a- with a taqua and a- also gave blows with kirpan on the back and abdomen of. the further blows given by a- fell on the left arm right leg and left heel of. at that time a- gave blows to pw- on left arm and left hand. thereafter $$$$ was dragged into the house of a- by accused persons. however due to the intervention of the people who had by then gathered there $$$$ was saved and the injured persons including the deceased were removed to the civil hospital gurdaspur in a car. it is further stated that on the way to the hospital kirpal singh succumbed to his injuries. pws. and were medically examined in civil hospital gurdaspur and the doctor who examined pws. and sent an intimation to the police gurdaspur at about.p. it has come in the prosecution evidence that the distance between the place of the incident and the hospital is about kms. the police at gurdaspur police station who received the intimation having come to know that the incident in question had taken place within the territorial jurisdiction of sadar police station pathankot sent intimation to the said pathankot police station and $$$. asi of the pathankot police station travelled to the hospital in gurdaspur which is about kms. away from the pathankot police station and reached the hospital at about.a. on.and he then recorded the statements of injured witnesses and registered an fir and after investigation filed the charge sheet as against the named accused and the trial court as stated above in the course of trial included more persons in the array of accused. the prosecution in support of its case had examined pws. and as eye -witnesses to the incident in question. it further examined dr. $$$ pw- who treated the said injured witnesses dr. jatinder kumar pw- who conducted the post mortem on the dead body of the deceased and $$$. asi pw-4 who conducted the investigation as also other formal witnesses the accused on their part had also examined defence witnesses to prove their case of right of private defence exercised by a- during which act of his he had caused some injuries to the deceased while other accused took the plea of total denial. $$$ it may be noted that nachhattar singh a- and prem singh a- are direct brothers. $$$ and $$$ a- are direct brothers. a-4 is the son -in -law of a- and a- is the brother -in -law of a- and a-. it has also come in evidence that a- and a- are also inter se related with the other accused. $$$ judge as stated above accepting the prosecution case in toto convicted all the accused persons before him of offences as stated above and in appeal the high court had accepted the prosecution case only in regard to accused a- to a- while it gave the benefit of doubt in regard to a-4 to a- and acquitted them of all charges. nachhattar singh a- has not preferred any appeal against his conviction and sentence which has become final. it is only $$$ and $$$ a- who have preferred this appeal. state has not preferred any appeal against the acquittal of a-4 to a-. mr. mahabir singh learned counsel for the appellants very seriously contended that there has been considerable delay in filing the fir. this was because of the fact that the complainant with the help of the police wanted to include all the relatives of a- therefore after considerable deliberations names of all other accused persons were also included in the complaint therefore even though the police came to know of the incident in question on the mid -night between and may a copy of the fir with special report as contemplated under section cr.p.c. reached the jurisdictional magistrate only at about hrs. on.. he also contended that the motive alleged by the prosecution could be hardly any reason to commit the murder. $$$ counsel also contended that it is because of this manipulation that the prosecution has not been able to examine any independent witness though admittedly they were present at the time of the incident. he also contended that there is contradiction on material facts in the evidence of pws. and who are the only eye -witnesses in this case. learned counsel further contended that the high court has seriously erred in invoking section ipc to convict the appellants who according to learned counsel had absolutely no role to pay in this fight that is even assuming that they were really present at the time of the incident. he supported this argument of his by contending that though originally it was only section ipc which was invoked against all the accused persons the high court having acquitted of the accused errously invoked section to convict these appellants because the prosecution could not prove any overt act against the appellants. on the contrary mr. b.r. $$$ learned counsel for the respondent supported the judgment of the high court. we have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the records. it is true that there is some delay in the fir reaching the jurisdictional magistrate. in our opinion the prosecution has given satisfactory explanation for this delay. the incident in question took place at about.p. on.which must have g on for some time before the injured could be transported to the hospital at gurdaspur which is about kms. away from the place of the incident. from the evidence of dr. $$$ pw- it is clear that these injured persons and the deceased were brought to the hospital at about.p. and on coming to know of the medico -legal aspect of the case he had intimated the police station at gurdaspur of the incident but the said police having come to know that the incident had occurred within the jurisdiction of police station $$$ informed the said police of this medico -legal case which police station is situated at about kms. from the place of the incident and taking into consideration said distance and the law and order situation then obtaining in punjab during the relevant period we do not find anything unusual in the sho of p.s. $$$ namely $$$ asi pw-4 reaching the hospital around a. on.. it has come in evidence that after recording the statement and making arrangements for the post mortem of the dead body of the deceased the fir recorded was sent to the jurisdictional magistrate which reached him around hrs. on.. after considering the argument of learned counsel in regard to this delay in sending the fir to the jurisdictional magistrate we notice that in reality there is no delay in preparing the fir but there was some delay in transmitting the said information to the jurisdictional magistrate. having been satisfied with the fact that the fir in question was registered in the morning of.we do not think that the delay thereafter in communicating it to the jurisdictional magistrate on the facts of this case has really given any room to doubt that the said document fir was created after much deliberations. at any rate while considering the complaint of the appellants in regard to the delay in the fir reaching the jurisdictional magistrate we will have to also bear in mind the creditworthiness of the ocular evidence adduced by the prosecution and if we find that such ocular evidence is worthy of acceptance the element of delay in registering a complaint or sending the same to the jurisdictional magistrate by itself would not in any manner weaken the prosecution case. as noted above learned counsel then contended that the motive alleged by the prosecution is very weak. this again would depend upon the evidence produced by the prosecution in regard to the actual incident. if the incident in question as projected by the prosecution is to be accepted then the presence or absence of a motive or strength of the said motive by itself also will not make the prosecution case weak. in this case the prosecution has pleaded that there was an altercation between the families $$$$ before the incident and it is because of the said altercation the incident of.had occurred in which person lost his life and persons were seriously injured and if the evidence of said injured witnesses is to be accepted then the existence of nature of motive would hardly matter. the appellants ' contention that the prosecution has relied only on interested evidence of pws. and and has not examined other independent witnesses who were present or for that matter the non examination of another son of the deceased by name $$$ should give raise to an adverse inference. can not also be accepted because so far as $$$ is concerned though there is some material on record to show that he was examined by a doctor on of the incident there is no material to show that he was actually involved in this fight. his name is not mentioned in the fir also therefore if the prosecution has thought it not necessary to examine this witness we do not think an adverse inference could be drawn on the basis of this non -examination of said $$$. this view of ours also holds good in regard to the so -called other independent witnesses who were present at the time of the incident since in a family feud like this it is rarely an independent witness would come forward to give evidence. be that as it may we will have to bear in mind these deficiencies pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellants while considering the creditworthiness of pws. and and in this background we consider the evidence of pws. and we notice that the defence has not been able to create any doubt in their evidence as the involvement of a- and these appellants are concerned. their evidence in this regard has been consistent and natural. they were injured witnesses and were victims of the assault. the defence has not been able to bring out any material contradiction in the evidence of pws. and. though the learned counsel for the appellants contended that there is some contradiction in the evidence of pws. and inter se in fact he has not been able to point out any such material contradiction. the high court acquitted the accused persons not on the ground that evidence of pws. and is false but on the ground that those accused persons who were unarmed hence were entitled to the benefit of doubt whereas in the case of the appellants and a- it accepted the evidence of pws. and in regard to their overt acts in causing injuries to the deceased and these witnesses. having independently considered the evidence of pws. and we are of the opinion that the evidence of pws. and does not suffer from any such contradiction or omission which makes the said evidence unbelievable. the argument of learned counsel that on facts of this case the high court could not have invoked section to convict these appellants seems to be based on the decisions of this court in $$$ v. state of u.p. $$$ / sc/0806/1998$$$ / sc/0806/1998 and $$$ and ors. v. state of bihar manu / sc/0559/1999manu / sc/0559/1999. in those cases on facts and noticing the nature of involvement of the accused conviction under section ipc was found to be improper hence set aside the said conviction but in regard to the applicability of section it was held that all that the prosecution has to establish is that there was a prior concert or meeting of minds between the accused persons and such prior concert or meeting of minds may be determined from the conduct of the offenders unfolding itself during the course of action and the declaration made by them just before mounting the attack. this court in those cases also held that the common intention can also be developed at the spur of the moment but there must be pre -arrangement or pre -meditated concert. in the instant case it is the prosecution case that at the time of the incident when deceased and pw-1 were walking towards their house the accused persons out of which a-1 and the appellants herein were armed with deadly weapons. with the help of acquitted accused persons waylaid the deceased. the prosecution says that while a-1 attacked the deceased pw-1 was prevented by the appellants herein from preventing the said attack on her father and when pw- came to the spot and tried to help his father he was also assaulted with a view to thwart his effort to protect his father. this itself goes to show that when these accused persons gathered in front of the house of a-1 and proceeded to assault the deceased all of them had shared the common intention of causing death of the deceased. though these appellants did not assault the accused it is clear that the manner in which they were armed and the manner in which they prevented pws. and from protecting their father by causing them grievous injuries also shows that this attack on pws. and was aimed at ensuring that a-1 was done away wit and the deceased did not get sufficient protection therefore we are of the considered view that the high court having acquitted the of accused persons was justified in invoking section to uphold the conviction of the appellants herein. for the reasons stated above this appeal fails and the same is dismissed.