

W.P.(C) No. 75/2012

1. The Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India has filed an affidavit. The Registry has raised several administrative objections to the affidavit. Since the objections are valid; the affidavit may be returned to the Advocate-on-Record. Mr. Maninder Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General submits that a fresh affidavit will be filed within two weeks giving the gist of the developments that have taken place so far pursuant to our order dated 13th January, 2015.

2. We have heard learned Counsel for the parties in respect of the order that we have passed on 13th January, 2015.

3. Insofar as the constitution of the Advisory Boards under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 (for short 'the Act') in various States and Union Territories is concerned, the learned Additional Solicitor General submits that steps are being taken in this regard by the Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India with various State Governments and Union Territories and he is hopeful that the Advisory Boards would be constituted within about 30 days or so.

4. Insofar as the appointment of the Chairperson of the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) is concerned, the learned Additional Solicitor General submits that steps have already been taken in this regard and it is hoped that the Chairperson will be appointed expeditiously. The Ministry should now conclude the process at the earliest.

5. As regards the appointment of Members of the NCPCR, it appears that no steps have been taken in this regard as yet. We direct the Secretary in the Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India (Nodal Officer) to take steps in this regard within a period of 30 days so that the process of appointment of Members of the NCPCR is also concluded expeditiously.

6. With regard to the website viz., www.trackthemissingchild.gov.in, relating to missing children, we commend and appreciate the excellent work that has been done by the Faculty of Management Studies, University of Delhi. The recommendations that have been made are acceptable to the parties and are accepted by us.

7. The learned Additional Solicitor General states that the recommendations made by the Faculty of Management Studies will be implemented in coordination with the Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India and the National Informatics Centre within one month and have a far better and advanced version of the website than the existing one. He also submits that the information on the website will be available through mobile application software. We take his statement on record.

8. The Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India may also consider having the information on the website in regional languages so that it would be convenient for non-Hindi and non-English speaking persons.

9. In appreciation of the excellent work that has been done by the Faculty of Management Studies, University of Delhi, particularly the Head and Dean and his team, we direct the Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India to pay a token honorarium of ` 1,00,000/- (Rupees one lakh only) to the Faculty of Management Studies within a period of one month.

10. Insofar as the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) relating to tracing out missing children is concerned, the Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) has requested for 60 days' more time to finalize the SOP. We extend the time for TISS to complete its consultation and to finalize the SOP by 10th April, 2015.

11. Insofar as the curriculum for training of police officers is concerned, the National Police Academy (NPA) has prepared very good module and curriculum. However, the curriculum is in a skeletal form and it has to be given some flesh. We request the Director of the NPA to look into the matter urgently and give flesh to the exercise already undertaken and also work out the modalities to train police officers through the State Police Academies by having a Training of Trainers Programme for police officers who may be Child Welfare Officers and may constitute the Special Juvenile Police Units under the Act. The Director of the NPA will consider the matter and give us the details on how the NPA can carry out the Training of Trainers Programme for further imparting training to the police officers through the State Police Academies throughout the country. This exercise should be completed on or before 10th April, 2015.

12. The Secretary in the Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India (Nodal Officer) is requested to continue the coordination with TISS and NPA on the subjects mentioned above.

13. The details about the status of missing children from each State have not been indicated to us by the Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India. Nor have we been given any details about the implementation of Operation Smile. We direct the Ministry to inform us about the status of missing children and status of recovered children in a State-wise tabular chart as on 31st March, 2015. The chart should be filed on or before 10th April, 2015. Details relating to the implementation of Operation Smile should also be furnished in a tabular form.

14. List the matter on 17th April, 2015.

W.P.(C) No. 906/2014

Detag this matter and list on 8th May, 2015.

