s.b. sinha j. leave granted. whether the family court has jurisdiction to adjudicate upon any question relating to the properties of divorced parties arises for consideration in this appeal. the said question arises out of a judgment and order dated.passed by a division bench of the kerala high court dismissing an appeal from an order passed by the family court ernakulam dated.in o.p. no. of. the parties to this appeal were married on.. a female child was born out their wedlock on.. allegedly after the birth of the child owing to deterioration in the health of the respondent herein the relationship of the parties became strained. the respondent contended that at the time of marriage a large amount in cash as also gold ornaments were given. from the cash amount the appellant herein purchased a property described in schedule a of the petition on.. the balance amount was kept by the appellant. he allegedly further sold the gold ornaments of the respondent and out of the sale proceeds he purchased the property described in schedule b of the petition. in respect of properties an agreement marked exhibit a was executed by the parties in terms whereof it was agreed that the properties purchased from the aforesaid amount will be transferred in the name of the respondent by the appellant. the appellant herein pronounced talaq on.after his relationship with the respondent became strained. in terms of the said agreement dated.the respondent filed a suit marked o. no. of in the family court on.. the appellant in his written statement alleged that the said agreement was signed by him under threat and coercion and further contended that several documents purported to have been executed by him in support thereof were also obtained by applying force. both the parties examined themselves as also proved various documents in the said suit before the family court. the family court by a judgment and order dated.decreed the suit in favour of the respondent herein upon arriving at a finding that she was the absolute owner of the schedule a property as also shares in the schedule b property. $$$ thereby and dissatisfied therewith the appellant preferred an appeal before the high court which was marked as mfa no. of. by reason of the impugned judgment dated.the said appeal has been dismissed. mr. $$$ learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant would submit that having regard to the provisions contained in section of the family courts act the family court had no jurisdiction to decide a dispute as regards properties claimed by a divorced wife. the learned counsel would urge that the jurisdiction exercisable by any family court being between the parties to a marriage which would mean parties to a subsisting marriage. in support of the said contention strong reliance has been placed on a judgment of a division bench of the allahabad high court in amjum $$$ v. smt. salma b. $$$ / up/0073/992$$$ / up/0073/992 air992all322 and $$$ v. sub -registrar hayatnagar and ors. $$$ / ap/0028/992$$$ / ap/0028/992 air992ap989. mr. t.l.v. $$$ learned $$$ appearing on behalf of the respondent on the other hand would contend that the matter is covered by an inter -parties judgment passed by a division bench of the kerala high court which is since reported in klt. as the appellant herein did not question the correctness of the said judgment he can not be permitted to turn round and now challenge the jurisdiction the family court. the family courts act was enacted to provide for the establishment of family courts with a view to promote conciliation in and secure speedy settlement of disputes relating to marriage and family affairs and for matters connected therewith. from a perusal of the statement of object and $$$ it appears that the said act inter alia seeks to exclusively provide within the jurisdiction of the family courts the matters relating to the property of the spouses or either of them. section of the act provides for the jurisdiction of the family court in respect of suits and proceedings as referred to in the $$$ appended thereto. $$$ c appended to section refers to a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties or of either of them. the fact of the matter as noticed hereinbefore clearly shows that the dispute between the parties to the marriage arose out of the properties claimed by spouse against the other. the respondent herein made a categorical statement to the effect that the properties were purchased out the amount paid in cash or by way of ornaments and the source of consideration for purchasing the properties described in schedules ' a and b of the suit having been borne out of the same the appellant herein was merely a trustee in relation thereto and could not have claimed any independent interest thereupon. it is also apparent that whereas the agreement marked as exhibit a1 was executed on.the appellant pronounced talaq on.. the wordings ' disputes relating to marriage and family affairs and for matters connected therewith in the view of this court must be given a board construction. the statement of object and reasons as referred to hereinbefore would clearly go to show that the jurisdiction of the family court extends inter alia in relation to properties of spouses or of either of them which would clearly mean that the properties claimed by the parties thereto as a spouse of other irrespective of the claim whether property is claimed during the subsistence of a marriage or otherwise. the submission of the learned counsel to the effect that this court should read the words a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage as parties to a subsisting marriage in our considered view would lead to miscarriage of justice. the family court was set up for settlement of family disputes. the reason for enactment of the said act was to set up a court which would deal with disputes concerning the family by adopting an approach radically different from that adopted in ordinary civil proceedings. the said act was enacted despite the fact that order of the code of civil procedure was inserted by reason of the code of civil procedure amendment act which could not bring about any desired result. it is now a well -settled principle of law that the jurisdiction of a court created specially for resolution of disputes of certain kinds should be construed liberally. the restricted meaning if ascribed to $$$ c appended to section of the act in our opinion would frustrate the object where for the family courts were set up. in amjum hasan siddiqui 's case supra an application was filed in terms of section of the muslim women protection of rights on divorce act. the question before the allahabad high court arose as to whether a family court could deal with such a dispute. it was held that no application could lie before the family court as the claim under section of the act would neither be a suit nor a proceeding within the meaning of section of the family courts act inasmuch as such an application could only be moved before the class magistrate having requisite jurisdiction as provided for in the code of criminal procedure. the said decision in our opinion can not be said to have any application whatsoever in the instant case. in smt. p. $$$ and anr. v. v. revichandran and anr. $$$ / ap/0026/92$$$ / ap/0026/92 air92ap0 the andhra pradesh high court was dealing with a case under section of the code of criminal procedure. it was held that although the matrimonial proceeding was moved before the family court the same could not have provided for a legal bar for the wife and the minor child for instituting a proceeding under section of the code of criminal procedure at $$$ where they were residing as both the rights are separate. as indicated hereinbefore balakrishnan j. as his lordship then was speaking for a division bench in a matter arising out of a preliminary issue on the question of jurisdiction held that the dispute over properties between parties to a marriage can not be confined to the parties to a subsisting marriage. we agree with the said view. the said decision being inter- parties and having attained finality would operate as res judicata. the further contention of the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant is that as the respondent had already filed an application under section of the muslim women protection of rights on divorce act wherein an amount of rs. was awarded in her favour the impugned proceeding was not maintainable. the proceedings are absolutely separate and distinct. the impugned judgment does not show that the said question was even argued before the high court. as indicated hereinbefore the factual issue involved in this appeal revolved round as to whether exhibit a1 was obtained by applying force or undue influence upon the appellant. the said contention has been negatived by both the family court as also the high court. we therefore find no merit in this appeal which is dismissed with costs. counsel 's fee assessed at rs. rupees only.a reproduction from ilr kerala series.