. the short question that arises for our consideration in these appeals which arises from the judgments and orders dated.and.as regards jurisdiction of the authorities under the central excise act whether it is permissible to resort to penalty proceedings or forfeiture of goods for non -payment of additional duty in terms of the additional duties of excise goods of special importance act for short the act by taking recourse to the provisions of the central excise act and rules framed thereunder. the respondents herein carry on business of manufacture of man made fabrics. they have alleged to have misdisclosed the composition of certain sorts of fabrics. they were further alleged to have under valued goods by not paying duty on the amount realised through debit notes. the collector by his order dated th november confirmed the levy of duty amounting to rs. the collector held that bales of fabric of sort nos. and are liable to be confiscated but since the goods had already been released he appropriated a sum of rs. towards the value of goods. he also imposed the penalty of rs. aggrieved the respondents preferred appeals before the central excise and gold control appellate tribunal. the tribunal relying upon the decision in the case of pier silk mills pvt. ltd. v. union of india reported in manu / de/0/manu / de/0/ allowed the appeals holding that the provisions of central excise act and the rules made thereunder so far as they relate to confiscation can not be made applicable for the breach of provisions of the act. it is against the said judgment and order of the tribunal the appellant is in appeal before us. mr. s.r. bhat learned counsel appearing for the appellant urged that the view taken by the tribunal in allowing the appeals was errous inasmuch as it is contrary to the decisions in the case of khema & co. agencies pvt. ltd. v. state of maharashtra reported in manu / sc/044/manu / sc/044/ and commissir of central excise v. ashok fashion ltd.reported in manu / gj/004/00manu / gj/004/00. in order to appreciate the issue it is relevant to set out the sub -section of section of the act as applicable in this matter and which runs as under:"section$$$ and collection of additional duties:(.....the provisions of the central excise and salt act and the rules made thereunder including those relating to refunds and exemptions from duty shall so far as may be apply in relation to the levy and collection of the additional duties as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of duties as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of the duties of excise on the goods specified in sub -section. a perusal of the said provision shows that the breach of the provision of the act has not been made penal or an offence and no power has been given to confiscate the goods. it only provides for application of the procedural provisions of the central excise and salt act and the rules made thereunder. it is no longer res integra that when the breach of the provisions of the act is penal in nature or a penalty is imposed by way of additional tax the constitutional mandate requires a clear authority of law for imposition for the same. article of the constitution provides that no tax shall be levied or collected except by authority of law. the authority has to be specific and explicit and expressly provided. the act created liability for additional duty for excise but created no liability for any penalty. that being so the confiscation proceedings against the respondents were unwarranted and without authority of law. the parliament by reason of section of the finance act act no. of substituted sub -section of section of the said act which now reads as under:". $$$ and collection of additional duties:-(1....the provisions of the central excise act of and the rules made thereunder including those relating to refunds exemptions from duty offences and penalties shall so far as may be apply in relation to the levy and collection of the additional duties as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of the duties of excise on the goods specified in sub -section. a comparison of the amended provisions with the unamended s would clearly demonstrate that the words ' offences and penalties have consciously been inserted therein. the cause of action for imposing the penalty and directions of confiscation arose in the present case in the year. the amended act therefore has no application to the facts of this case. the gujarat high court in ashok fashion ltd. supra although took notice of the fact that the cause of action therein arose in the year but inadvertently or otherwise noticed the amended provisions of sub -section of section of the act. it furthermore although noticed the decision of m / s. khemka & co. agencies pvt. ltd. supra as would appear from the discussion made hereinafter but chose to follow the minority decision and not the majority. in m / s. khemka & co. agencies pvt. ltd. supra this court categorically laid down paras and which runs as under:". penalty is not merely sanction. it is not merely adjunct to assessment. it is not merely consequential to assessment. it is not merely machinery. penalty is in addition to tax and is a liability under the act. reference may be made to section of the indian income -tax act where penalty is provided for concealment of income. penalty is in addition to the amount of income -tax. this court in jain brothers v. union of india manu / sc/02/69manu / sc/02/69 said that penalty is not a continuation of assessment proceedings and that penalty partakes of the character of additional tax. the federal court in chatturam v. c.i.t.bihar manu / fe/00/47manu / fe/00/47 itr said that liability does not depend on assessment. there must be a charging section to create liability. there must be a liability created by the act. second the act must provide for assessment.  the act must provide for enforcement of the taxing provisions. the mere fact that there is machinery for assessment collection and enforcement of tax and penalty in the state act does not mean that the provision for penalty in the state act is treated as penalty under the central act. the meaning of penalty under the central act can not be enlarged by the provisions of machinery of the state act incorporated for working out the central act. $$$ j. in his concurring opinion held paras and which runs as under:"$$$$. i also find from the mysore act of that section of the act was entirely re -cast in. it would i think be carrying the theory of referential legislation too far to assume that section of the central act purported to authorise the state legislatures to impose liabilities in the nature of additional tax or penalties leaving their rates and conditions for their imposition also to be determined by the state legislatures as and when the state legislatures decided to impose or amend them. it is evident that these differ from state to state and in the same state at different times. a conferment of such an uncontrolled power upon the state legislatures could if it was really intended be said to travel beyond the provide of permissible delegated legislation on the principles laid down $$$$ by this court in re delhi laws 's case supra as no guidelines are given in section about the nature conditions or extent of penalties leviable. if such a power was really conferred would it not amount to an abdication of an essential legislative function with respect to a matter found as item of the union list i of the schedule so that according to article of our constitution parliament has exclusive power to legislative on a topic covered by it as this question was not argued before us i would only say that the correct canon of construction to apply in such a case is that we should so interpret section of the central act if possible that no part of it may conceivably be invalid for excessive delegation. the well known maxim applicable in such cases is ut res magis valeat quam pereat. it is evident from section of the bombay act of that there is a particular percentage of the amount of tax levied which is prescribed as penalty to be paid as an addition to the amount of tax for $$$$ after the expiry of the prescribed period of default. in other words it is a liability in the nature of an additional or penal tax. section of the mysore act also makes it clear that on an application made to the magistrate such as the one made in the case which has come up before us from mysore the penalty may be equated with a line. section of the bombay act of speaks of certain offences and penalties. indeed chapter of that act is itself headed as offences and penalties. $$$ j.however in his dissenting opinion inter alia held that penalty can be levied as incidental to the levy and recovery of tax stating as under:"as the power to impose penalty is specifically provided for in section of the bombay sales tax act for enforcing payment of tax payable under it it is unnecessary to speculate whether but for the express provision in that act a power to impose penalty for enforcement of tax payable under that act would have been implied. the object of the provision for the imposition of penalty in section of the bombay sales tax act is to provide a stimulant to the dealer to observe the mandate of the section directing the payment of the tax within the prescribed time. in other words the provision for imposition of penalty in section of the bombay sales tax act facilitates the collection of tax as it is a sanction for non -observance of the duty to pay the tax within the prescribed time. it operates as a deterrent against the commission of breach of that duty and is a means to enforce the payment of tax within the time prescribed. the gujarat high court in ashok fashion supra adopted the minority view holding:"9.it will thus be seen that penalty provision are an integral part of assessment and collection of duties of which the necessary adjuncts are confiscation and penalty without which the imposition of taxes will lack teeth and become ineffective. if power to impose penalty for violation of the obligation to pay additional duty of excise is excluded in respect of the goods enumerated in the fist schedule of the additional duties act then these taxation provisions would be reduced to a donation drive in respect of these taxation provisions would be reduced to a donation drive in respect of these very items for which duty of excise is also imposed under the central excise act and the rules made thereunder and violation of which would entail both confiscation and penalty. it further referred to the amended provisions of the said act as would appear from the following:"7. it will be noticed from sub -section of section of the additional duties act that all the provisions of the central excise act and the rules made thereunder including those relating to refunds and exemptions are made applicable so far as may be in relation to the levy and collection of additional duty of excise. the provisions of the central excise act and the rules made thereunder are made applicable to the additional duty of excise in the same manner and extent to which they apply in relation to the levy and collection of the duties of excise on the goods specified in column of the first schedule referred to in section of the additional duties act. this is so stated because all the goods specified in the said first schedule were also subjected to duties of excise at the rates set forth in the schedule to the central excise tariff of under section of central excise act which provision also lays down that such duties of excise shall be levied and collected in such manner as may be prescribed. the decision in ashok fashion supra was therefore rendered on total misapplication of the law laid down by the constitution bench decision by m / s. khemka & co. agencies pvt. ltd. supra. we are bound by the constitution bench decision in m / s. khemka & co. agencies pvt. ltd. supra. the delhi high court also in pioneer silk mills pvt. ltd. supra upon noticing m / s. khemka & co. agencies pvt. ltd. supra and various other decisions clearly held:"7. when penalty is additional tax constitutional mandate requires a clear authority of law for imposition thereof. if long -drawn arguments are needed to explain if the act by referential legislation or legislation by incorporation levies penalty or not it is better for the court to lean in favour of the tax payer. there is no room for presumption in such a case. the mere fact that all these years the additional duty act has not been challenged on this ground is of no consequence if authority of law as mandated by the constitution is lacking. we may also note in the passing that it was submitted before us that penalty so realised earlier has never been distributed among the states as part of net proceeds of the collection of the additional duties of excise under the additional duties act. this statement made at the bar was not challenged. since however this point was not raised in the writ petition and the revenue had no opportunity to reply in its counter -affidavit we leave the matter at that. $$$ of penalty which is an additional tax has to be under the authority of law which should be clear specific and explicit. furthermore this court recently in $$$ v. union of india and ors.reported in manu / $$$ / sc/0628/0 air0sc268 held as follows:"7. we are however not oblivious of the fact that potential public mischief can not be a ground to invoke the court 's interpretative role to make a new offence. making of legislation is not the job of the judiciary. making of a penal legislation by the judiciary is strictly out of its bound. however when the law working in the field is clear then what is necessary for it is to find out is to whether any offence has been created or not. once it is held that the subject -matter comes within the purview of the law the court may not go further and say by interpretive reasoning that the same is not so created. it is now a well settled principles of law that expropriatory legislation must be strictly construed see d.l.f. qutab enclave complex educational charitable trust v. state of haryana and ors.reported in manu / sc/0116/0manu / sc/0116/0. it is further trite that a penal statute must receive strict construction. the matter may be considered from another angle. the parliament by reason of the amending act of consciously brought in the expression offences and penalties in sub -section of section of the act. the mischief rule if applied would clearly show that such amendment was brought with a view to remedy the defect contained in the unamended provisions of sub -section of section of the act. offences having regard to the provisions contained in article of the constitution of india can not be given a retrospective effect. in that view of the matter too sub -section of section of the act as amended can not be said to have any application at all. in view of the aforesaid decisions it must be held that the confiscation proceedings taken against the respondents and the penalty imposed upon them were totally without the authority of law and were rightly set aside by the tribunal. for the aforesaid reason we do not find any merit in the appeals. they fail and are accordingly dismissed. no costs.