. the short question that arises for consideration in the present appeals is as to whether passing of the accounts test for the post of senior assistant was a pre -requisite. the contention of the appellant is that since the $$$ ministerial service rules did not apply to the department of chief electrical inspectorate the said condition is not applicable in his case. the appellant was appointed in the year as junior assistant under the chief electrical inspectorate. it is relevant to mention here that prior to the year the chief electrical inspectorate was called the electricity department headed by the chief $$$. after constitution of the $$$ electricity board the electricity department became the chief electrical inspectorate headed by the chief electrical inspector in place and instead of the chief $$$. on 12th november the appellant was promoted as a senior assistant subject to his passing the accounts test within $$$$ years. the appellant passed the said examination after expiry of the said period of years. he was however promoted to the post of senior assistant on 10th december. in the year the appellant was promoted as a superintendent. it is at this stage the respondents herein challenged the promotion and seniority of the appellant before the $$$ state administrative tribunal. the tribunal disposed of the o.as. and held that since the appellant did not pass the requisite examination therefore he was junior to the respondents herein. it is against the said judgment of the tribunal the appellant is in appeal before us. while entertaining these petitions this court granted leave confined to direction no. of the order of the tribunal which runs as under:"13(c while preparing the seniority list of senior assistants the relevant criteria among others to be applied are that passing of accounts test for subordinate officers part -i is necessary for promotion to the rank of senior assistant from junior assistant. it is not in dispute that the services of the appellant were governed by the $$$ ministerial service rules. rule of the said rules provide for special qualifications required to hold certain posts. electricity department of the state of $$$ is of the departments specifically mentid in the said rules. it has been provided therein that passing of the accounts test for subordinate officers part i is an essential qualification for holding the post of senior assistants. it is not the case of the appellant herein that the chief electrical inspectorate at any point of time ceased to be a department under the government of $$$ or by reason of creation of chief electrical inspectorate in the state in place of the department of electricity the service conditions of the appellant were no longer governed under the $$$ ministerial service rules. in that view of the matter there can not be any doubt whatsoever that the said rules were applicable in the case of the appellant throughout. only because at a later stage a notification was issued by the government of andhra pradesh to the effect that the head of the chief electrical inspectorate shall be the chief $$$ in place of chief electrical inspector the same by itself would not mean that the andhra pradesh ministerial service rules and in particular rule aforementioned had specifically been made applicable in case of the employees of the chief electrical inspectorate only thereafter. once it is held that the office of the chief electrical inspector or the chief $$$ as the case may be was a department of the government of andhra pradesh rule must be held to be applicable. in that view of the matter the judgment of the high court can not be faulted inasmuch as the date of passing of the examination would be the date for the purpose of reckoning the seniority of the employees concerned vis -a -vis the other employees. in that view of the matter the appellant was not entitled to be shown as senior to the respondents. in view of the above the appeals are dismissed. there shall be no order as to costs.