t.s. thakur j.leave granted. the short question that arises for consideration in this appeal by special leave is whether a dispute arising out of a contract for sale and purchase of immovable property owned by the respondents was amenable to adjudication under section of the m.p. cooperative societies act. by his order dated st march the deputy registrar co -operative societies ujjain before whom the proceedings were initiated answered that question in the affirmative and decreed specific performance of the contract entered into between the parties. a appeal preferred by the sellers respondents -herein before the joint registrar ujjain failed and was dismissed by his order dated $$$$. aggrieved by the said orders the respondents preferred a appeal before the m.p. state co -operative tribunal bhopal who allowed the same and set aside the orders passed by the deputy registrar and that passed by the joint registrar holding that the dispute raised by the purchaser -society could not be made the subject matter of proceeding under section of the m.p. cooperative societies act. the purchaser -society then filed writ petition no. of which was heard and dismissed by a division bench of the high court of madhya pradesh. the high court concurred with the view taken by the tribunal that a dispute arising out of a contract of sale and purchase of immovable property was beyond the purview of section of the act. the present appeal calls in the question the correctness of the said judgments and orders. section of the m.p. cooperative societies act may at this stage be extracted in extenso:. disputes notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force any dispute touching the constitution management or business or the liquidation of a society shall be referred to the registrar by any of the parties to the dispute if the parties thereto are among the $$$ a society its committee any past committee any past or present officer any past or present agent any past or present servant or a nominee heirs or legal representatives of any deceased agent or deceased servant of the society or the liquidator of the society;(b a member past member or a person claiming through a member past member or deceased member of a society or of a society which is a member of the society;(c a person other than a member of the society who has been granted a loan by the society or with whom the society has or had business transactions and any person claiming through such a person.a surety of a member past member of deceased member or a person other than a member who has been granted a loan by the society whether such a surety is or is not a member of the society.any other society or the liquidator of such a society and(f a creditor of a society.for the purpose of sub -section a dispute shall include-(i a claim by a society for any debt or demand due to it from a member past member or the nominee heir or legal representative of a deceased member whether such debt or demand be admitted or not;(ii a claim by a surety against the principal debtor where the society has recovered from the surety any amount in respect of any debt or demand due to it from the principal debtor as a result of the default of the principal debtor whether such debt or demand be admitted or a claim by a society for any loss caused to it by a member past member or deceased member any officer past officer or deceased officer any agent past agent or deceased agent or any servant past servant or deceased servant or its committee past or present whether such loss be admitted or not;(iv a question regarding rights etc.including tenancy rights between a housing society and its tenants or members and(v any dispute arising in connection with the election of any officer of the society or of composite society;provided that the registrar shall not entertain any dispute under this clause during the period commencing from the announcement of the election programmed till the declaration of the results.if any question arising whether a dispute referred to the registrar is a dispute the decision thereon of the registrar shall be final and shall not be called in question in any court. a careful reading of the above would show that for a dispute to be brought within the purview of section essential requirements must be satisfied viz. that the dispute must touch the constitution management or business of the society or must relate to the liquidation of the co -operative society and that the dispute must be between parties referred to in clauses a to f of section supra. it is only when the twin requirements are in the facts and circumstances of a given case satisfied that a dispute can be said to be amenable to adjudication under section. failure of any of the requirements would take the dispute beyond the said provision. in the case at hand the dispute raised by the $$$ -society before the deputy registrar related to the alleged refusal of the respondent to complete the sale transaction in terms of the agreement to sell executed between the respondents and/or their predecessors -in -interest on the hand and the $$$ -society on the other. the nature of the dispute therefore did not obliviously touch the constitution and management of the society nor did the dispute have anything to do with the liquidation of the society. whether or not the dispute sought to be raised was a dispute touching the business of the society is in that view of the questions that needs to be examined. as regards the requirement viz. that the dispute must be between the persons referred in clauses a to f of section of the act it is common ground that the respondents -sellers were not members of the society nor do they fall under any of the clauses a b 'd or f enumerated under section. this would mean that the respondents must answer the description of persons mentid in $$$ c to section of the act. the tribunal as also the high court have taken the view that the respondents do not answer the description of parties falling under section. that is because the $$$ -society had neither granted any loan to the respondents or any of them nor did the respondents have any business transactions with the society. the tribunal and the high court have interpreted the words business transactions to mean a series of transactions in connection with the business of the society. the expression did not according to them postulate a single contract for sale or purchase of the property between the society and a party. distinct questions that need to be answered by this court therefore are:(i whether the dispute in the case at hand touches the business of the $$$ -society $$$ whether the dispute sought to be raised arising as it is out of the execution of a contract for sale of property by the respondent in favour of the $$$ -society constitutes business transactions within the meaning of section )(c)?re question no. the expression business of the society has not been defined in the act or elsewhere. the expression has fallen for interpretation of the courts in the country with commendable frequency. pronouncements from different high courts have even led to a cleavage in judicial opinion as to the true meaning and scope of that expression appearing as it was in section of the co -operative societies act and later in analogous provisions made in different state enactments. line of decision takes a liberal view of the expression business of the society while the other prefers a narrower interpretation. both these were noticed by this court in $$$ co -operative bank ltd. v. $$$ and ors. $$$ / sc/04/6$$$ / sc/04/6 air sc. an elaborate discussion on the subject led this court to declare that the legislature had used the expression business of the society in a narrower sense and approved the view taken by the high courts of madras bombay and kerala in preferences to that taken by the high courts of madhya pradesh and nagpur. while saying so this court enumerated kinds of disputes mentid in section of the maharashtra co -operative societies act and observed the question arises whether the dispute touching the assets of a society would be a dispute touching the business of a society. this would depend on the nature of the society and the rules and bye -laws governing it. ordinarily if a society owns buildings and lets out parts of buildings which it does not require for its own purpose it can not be said that letting out of those parts is a part of the business of the society. but it may be that it is the business of a society to construct and buy houses and let them out to its members. in that case letting out property may be part of its business. in this case the society is a co -operative bank and ordinarily a co -operative bank can not be said to be engaged in business when it lets out properties owned by it. therefore it seems to us that the present dispute between a tenant and a member of the bank in a building which has subsequently been acquired by the bank can not be said to be a dispute touching the business of the bank and the appeal should fail on this short ground.xxxwhile we agree that the nature of business which a society does can be ascertained from the objects of the society it is difficult to subscribe to the proposition that whatever the society does or is necessarily required to do for the purpose of carrying out its objects can be said to be part of its business. we however agree that the word touching is very wide and would include any matter which relates to or concerns the business of a society but we are doubtful whether the word affects should also be used in defining the scope of the word touching. dealing in particular with the question whether a dispute touching the assets of the society would be a dispute touching the business of the society this court observed:8. xxx..ordinarily if a society owns buildings and lets out parts of buildings which it does not require for its own purpose it can not be said that letting out of those parts is a part of the business of the society. but it may be that it is the business of a society to construct and buy houses and let them out to its members. in that case letting out property may be part of its business... the question was once again considered by this court in o.n. bhatnagar v. smt. $$$ and ors. $$$ / sc/07/$$$$$$$ / sc/07/$$$$ scc where this court referred to the decision in deccan merchant 's case supra and observed thus the court adopted the narrower meaning given to the word business as expressed by the madras bombay and kerala high courts in preference to the wide meaning given by the madhya pradesh and nagpur high courts. according to the view taken in $$$ cooperative bank case the word business in the context means any trading or commercial or other similar business activity of the society. it was held that the word business in section of the act has been used in a narrower sense and that it means the actual trading commercial or other similar business activity of the society which the society is authorised to enter into under the act and the rules and its bye -laws. on the facts of the case before it this court in bhatnagar 's case supra held that the act of initiating proceedings for removing an act of trespass by a stranger from a flat allotted to of its members could not but be a part of its business. this court held that it was as much the concern of the society formed with the object of providing residential accommodation to its members which was normally its business as it was of the members to ensure that the flats are in occupation of its members in accordance with the bye laws framed by it rather than the occupation of a person who had no subsisting reason to be in such occupation. the decision in deccan merchant 's case supra was on facts held to be distinguishable and resort to proceedings under section of the act held legally permissible. reference may also be made to the decision of this court in the co -operative central bank ltd. and ors. v. the additional industrial tribunal $$$ and ors. $$$ / sc/06/$$$$$$$ / sc/06/$$$$ scc wherein the question was whether the expression business of the society appearing in section of the andhra pradesh co -operative societies act covered a dispute in respect of alteration of the conditions of service of an employee of the society. the tribunal and the high court had in that case taken the view that such a dispute fell outside the purview of section of the act. affirming that view this court observed in that case $$$ case this court had to interpret section of the maharashtra co -operative societies act. maharashtra act of the dispute related to alteration of a number of conditions of service of the workmen which relief could only be granted by an industrial tribunal dealing with an industrial dispute.xxx..since the word business is equated with the actual trading or commercial or other similar business activity of the society and since it has been held that it would be difficult to subscribe to the proposition that whatever the society does or is necessarily required to do for the purpose of carrying out its objects such as laying down the conditions of service of its employees can be said to be a part of its business it would appear that a dispute relating to conditions of service of the workmen employed by the society can not be held to be a dispute touching the business of the society.emphasis supplied). in the case at hand the objects of the $$$ -society as set out in the articles of association are as under objective of this society would be to make arrangement for the construction of building to purchase sale take on rent or rent out prepare land for construction of building and to make arrangement related to social educational and entertainment to its members and it would be complete right to this society to carry out such work which will be necessary and proper in its opinion. these rights shall mean and include to purchase land take land on lease sale exchange mortgage let out on lease sub -lease to give resignation or to accept resignation and to do all other relative work and to sell the building on instalment on proper and necessary restrictions to give loan or guarantee of loan for facilitating construction of building to make repairing and will include other rights to carry out work related to it. purchase of land for being used in the manner set out in the objects extracted above is therefore of the facets of the business that the society undertakes. such purchase is directly linked to the object of developing the acquired land for allotment of house sites to the members of the society. there is therefore a clear and discernible nexus between acquisition / purchase of land and the object of providing house sites to the members which under the circumstances happens to be the main business of the society. it is not a case where the facts giving rise to the dispute are not relatable to the objects of the society or where the connect between the facts constituting the dispute and the objects of the society is remote or their interplay remarkably tenuous or peripheral as was the position in co -operative central bank ltd.'s case supra involving alteration of the conditions of service of the employees of the society. we have in that view no hesitation in holding that the dispute arising out of the purchase of the land owned by the respondents was in the instant case a dispute touching the business of the $$$ -society. question no. is answered accordingly.re question no. the essential requirement for a dispute to fall within the purview of section is that the parties to the dispute must be those enumerated in sub -clauses a to f under section of the act. $$$ a of section envisages disputes between a society its committee any past committee any past or present officer any past or present agent any past or present servant or a nominee heirs or legal representatives of any deceased agent or deceased servant of the society or the liquidator of the society. this clause has obviously no application to the facts of the present case. that is true even about clause b whereunder the dispute between a member past member or a person claiming through a member past member or deceased member of a society or of a society which is a member of the society is brought within the purview of section. we shall presently deal with clause c to section upon which counsel for the $$$ -society placed reliance but before we may do so we may deal with the application of $$$s d and. $$$ d of section envisages disputes involving a surety of a member past member of the society member or a person other than a member who was appointed by the society whether or not such a society is a member of the society. so also $$$s and do not have any application to the case at hand as the same deal with disputes between any other society the liquidator of such a society or creditor of a society. that leaves us with $$$ c of section which postulates disputes between non -members to whom loans are granted by the society and the society or disputes between the society or a non -member with whom the society has or had business transactions or any person claiming under such a society. it was argued on behalf of the $$$ -society that the dispute between society on the hand and the respondent on the other arising out of the contract for sale and purchase of immovable property fell under this clause inasmuch as the society was a party to the dispute arising out of a transaction that constitutes a business transaction between the society and the respondent non -members. the fact that the dispute related to a single transaction did not according to the learned counsel for the $$$ make any material difference having regard to the provisions of section of the m.p. general $$$s act. that provision it was argued made it clear that words in singular shall include the plural and vice -a -versa. this implied that a single business transaction could also bring the dispute arising out of any such transaction within the purview of section. on behalf of the respondents it was contended that section had no application to the case at hand not only because a single transaction did not constitute business but also because the legislature had deliberately used the expression business transactions to make it clear that it is only a series of transactions that would bring the dispute arising out of such transactions within the purview of section. the scheme underlying chapter vii of the act that provides for settlement of disputes clearly suggests that it is only when there are multiple transactions which can be described as business transactions that any dispute arising out of such transactions would come within the purview of section. in the light of such legislative intent the provisions of general $$$s act could not be called in aid by the appellant -society. what is the true scope and meaning of the expression business transactions appearing in $$$ c of section of the act is what falls for our consideration. that expression has not been defined in the act or elsewhere. advanced law lexicon 3rd edition by p. $$$ describes the expression business transaction as under business transaction is a generic expression used in the sense that it is a transaction which a businessman in a commercial business would enter into. the above meaning ascribed to the expression is fairly accurate hence acceptable. all that may be added is that in order that a transaction may be treated as business transaction it must be a transaction that answers the above description from the stand point of both the parties to the transaction. it can not be a business transaction from the standpoint of party to the transaction and something else from the other. it must be business bilaterally. so viewed a single transaction where an owner of immovable property agrees to sell his land to a society may or may not constitute a business transaction depending upon whether the seller is in the business of selling property for profit. if the seller is not in any such business the transaction from his stand point will not be a business transaction no matter from the point of view of the society the transaction may be a business transaction because the society is in the business of buying land and developing it for the benefit of its members. a transaction of sale of property would in such a case fall outside the expression business transaction. a somewhat similar view was taken by this court in manipur administration v. m. $$$ $$$ / sc/003/163$$$ / sc/003/163 air sc. this court was in that case dealing with the provisions of manipur foodgrains dealers licensing orders. the question was whether a single transaction of sale purchase or storage of food grains was enough to make the person concerned a dealer and whether any such act would constitute business. repelling the contention that a single transaction would also constitute business this court observed in dealing with the question as to whether the respondent is guilty under section of the essential commodities act it is necessary to decide whether he can be said to be a dealer within the meaning of $$$ of the order. a dealer has been defined by $$$ and that definition we have already noticed. the said definition shows that before a person can be said to be a dealer it must be shown that he carries on business of purchase or sale or storage for sale of any of the commodities specified in the schedule and that the sale must be in quantity of mds. or more at any time. it would be noticed that the requirement is not that the person should merely sell purchase or store the foodgrains in question but that he must be carrying on the business of such purchase sale or storage and the concept of business in the context must necessarily postulate continuity of transactions. it is not a single casual or solitary transaction of sale purchase or storage that would make a person a dealer. it is only where it is shown that there is a sort of continuity of or the other of the said transactions that the requirements as to business postulated by the definition would be satisfied. if this element of the definition is ignored it would be rendering the use of the word business redundant and meaningless. it has been fairly conceded before us by mr. $$$ that the requirement that the transaction must be of mds. or more at any time governs all classes of dealings with the commodities specified in the definition. whether it is a purchase or sale or storage at any time it must be of mds. or more. in other words there is no dispute before us that retail transactions of less than mds. of the prescribed commodities are outside the purview of the definition of a dealer. reference may also be made to the decision of this court in barendra prasad ray and ors. v. income tax officer a ward foreign section and ors. $$$ / sc/08/$$$$$$$ / sc/08/$$$$ scc where this court interpreted the word business and held that the same was an expression of wide import and means an activity carried on continuously and systematically by a person by the application of his labour or skill with a view to earning profit. in b.r. enterprises etc. v. state of u.p. and ors. etc. $$$ / sc/0330/$$$$$$$ / sc/0330/$$$$ scc this court held that business is a term wider than trade. it includes almost anything which is an occupation as distinguished from pleasure. the term must however be construed according to its context. to the same effect are the decisions of this court in mahesh chandra v. regional manager u.p. financial corporation and ors. $$$ / sc/019/$$$$$$$ / sc/019/$$$$ scc and s. $$$ v. r. $$$ / sc/047/$$$$manu / sc/047/$$$$ scc. suffice it to say that while the expression business is of a very wide import and means any activity that is continuous and systematic perceptions about what would constitute business may vary from public to private sector or from industrial financing to commercial banking sectors. what is certain is that any activity in order to constitute business must be systematic and continuous. a single transaction in the circumstances like the in the case at hand would not constitute business for both the parties to the transaction. at any rate the legislature having used the expression business transactions has left no manner of doubt that it is not just a solitary transaction between a society on the hand and a party on the other which would bring any dispute arising out of any such transaction within the purview of section. the dispute must be between parties who have had a series of transactions each constituting a business transaction in order that the provisions of section are attracted and a dispute arising out of any such transaction brought within its purview. the argument that the plural used in the expression business transactions must include the singular in view of the provisions of section of the m.p. general clauses act has not impressed us. we say so because section of the m.p. general clauses act like section of the central general clauses act postulates singular to include the plural and vice -versa only if no different intention appears from the context. that intention in the case at hand appears to be evident not only from the scheme of the act but also from the context in which the expression business transactions has been used. the purpose and the intent underlying the provision appears to be to bring only such disputes under the purview of section as are disputes arising out of what is business for both the sides and comprise multiple transactions. decisions of this court in newspapers ltd. v. state industrial tribunal u.p. and ors. manu / sc/0078/1957manu / sc/0078/1957 air sc and $$$ and co. v. the commissioner of income tax manu / sc/0061/1958manu / sc/0061/1958 air sc have settled the legal position and declared that the principle underlying section of the general clauses act regarding singular including the plural and vice versa does not have universal application and that the principle can apply only when no contrary intention is deducible from the scheme or the language used in the statute. in the case at hand that there was a single transaction whereunder the respondents -sellers had agreed to sell to the appellant -society a parcel of land to the society for use by the society in terms of the objects for which it is established. it may in that sense be a transaction that touches the business of the appellant -society but it is common ground that the respondents were not in the business of selling land as a commercial or business activity for it is nobody 's case that the respondents were property dealers or had a land bank and were as a systematic activity selling land to make money. if the respondents were agriculturists who had agreed to sell agricultural land to the appellant -company the transaction was from their point of view not a business transaction. for ought we know that transaction may have been prompted by family necessity poverty or some such other compulsion. such a transaction without any business element in the same could not constitute a business transaction leave alone business transactions within the meaning of section. for the reasons stated above question no. is to be answered in the negative. in the result this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed but in the circumstances leaving the parties to bear their own costs.c.a. no. @ slp c no(s. hon'ble mr. justice t.s. thakur pronounced the judgment of the bench comprising his lordship hon'ble mr. justice r.k. agarwal and $$$. justice r. $$$. leave granted. the appeal is dismissed in terms of the signed reportable judgment.conmt. $$$. c no. in slp c no. in view of our judgment delivered in the appeal $$$$ we see no reason to keep these proceedings on our board. the contempt petition is accordingly dismissed.