. these applications in our considered opinion are practically superfluous inasmuch the very grievance expressed in these applications was already addressed considered and dealt with in i.a. no. of in i.a. no. in wp(c no. in the order dated.. in the said application the prayer of the applicant was as $$$ the existing pensions of all past pensioners who retired after.and the pensioners whose pensions were consolidated as per karnataka model shall be raised by.times on par with the other pensioners subject to minimum of % of the revised pay scale of pay of their respective post;(ii and in the alternative consolidation of the existing pensions of the above section of pensioners as per the methodology adopted by the central government in pursuance of recommendations of the vith central pay commission in para.of the o.m.f. no. p & pw(a government of india dated..while considering the prayer in the said application the following order came to be issued:"i.a. no. of in i.a. no. in wp(c no. applicants in this i.a. are judicial officers who retired after january but prior to january. they are aggrieved by the recommendation of justice padmanabhan committee as contained in paragraph of its report. paragraph of the recommendations of the committee insofar as it is relevant is as under:"pare the recommendations of the first national judicial pay commission with respect to past pensioners are given in paragraph.which are as under: the revised pension of the retired judicial officers should be % of the minimum of the post held at the time of retirement as revised from time to time. p.p. rao learned senior advocate appearing for the applicants pointed out that the padmanabhan committee apparently due to oversight fixed the revised pension of the concerned judicial officers at % of the minimum of the post held at the time of retirement as revised from time to time. consequently as a result of the revision the concerned judicial officers are getting as pension an amount which is lower than what they earlier received before revision.the grievance of the applicants appears to be justified and it is significant to note that both the high court of andhra pradesh and the state government of andhra pradesh in their respective responses have supported the case of the applicants.mr. a.t.m. sampath learned amicus curiae also submitted that there was evidently some error in the recommendation of the man committee.we accordingly accept the prayer of the applicants and allow this i.a. in terms of prayer clause i of the application.i.a. no. stands disposed of. after noting the above said order already passed by this court on.and also a g.o. issued by the state of andhra pradesh vide g.o. no. dated.complying with the directions contained in the order dated.we issued notice to all the state governments as well as the high courts in our order dated.and called for their response. only states have responded by filing reply affidavit namely orissa $$$ and $$$. while on behalf of state of orissa time of weeks was sought for to file the status report the state of tamil nadu after referring to the manner in which the pension is being dispensed to the retirees prior to.ultimately submitted that the state will abide by the orders / directions to be issued by this court. so far as the state of $$$ is concerned a peculiar stand is being taken to the effect that in the state of $$$ a different pattern of pension is being adopted with reference to other state government employees which is being applied to judicial officers as well. mr. $$$ learned additional advocate general appearing for the state of $$$ drew our attention to the said stand taken in the reply filed before us and sought for affirmation of the said position being followed by the state of $$$. no other state government has responded to our notice dated.and filed any affidavit or reply. there is also no representation from any of the state government opposing this application. having heard mr. p.p. rao learned senior counsel for the applicant and mr. $$$ learned additional advocate general appearing for the state of $$$ at the very outset we state that the issue as noted by us is already covered by the order of this court dated.. therefore nothing more is to be ordered by us in this application except simply adopting the said order already issued. the prayer in this application is for a direction to the state governments except the states of andhra pradesh and telengana to secure time -bound implementation and compliance of the order dated.passed by this court in i.a. no. of in i.a. no. in wp(c no. since by our order dated.the prayer as made in the said i.a. no. of in i.a. no. in wp(c no. as extracted in the earlier part of this order has already been passed based on which the states of andhra pradesh and telengana have passed orders and issued g.o.namely g.o. no. dated.we direct that all the other state governments should follow the suit and pass appropriate notifications implementing the directions contained in our order dated.in respect of their retirees between.and.. whatever arrears payable for the period from.uptill this date shall be calculated and paid expeditiously and the future calculation of pension for $$$$ should be made on that basis from the month of july. the arrears shall be paid within months from the date of production of a copy of this order. these i.as. shall stand allowed with the above directions.i.a. no. this application inter alia is for a direction to the respondent state of bihar to strictly adhere to the recommendations of the shetty commission insofar as reimbursement of medical bills of the retired judicial officers as recommended in para.of the report read with para. insofar as medical reimbursement is concerned the state government came forward with a resolution dated.as per which the stand was that the medical expenses of the retired officers of the state judicial officers shall be reimbursed at par with the serving officers of the service. reimbursement would be done from law department of the state government and that the said department will issue the process and directions in that respect. in the reply affidavit filed before this court the said resolution has been explained in the following manner in para. that in this regard it is respectfully submitted that the law department has already issued a detailed guideline with respect to the procedure applicable for reimbursement and it has specifically provided therein that the retired judicial officers settled in the state shall get the reimbursement up to from principal district judge of the district from where they were getting their pension and in case of reimbursement of claim above they will get the reimbursement from the law department on approval of finance department. same process will apply for payment of medical advance of retired judicial officers. on a reference to the resolution dated.and as explained in the reply affidavit in para we find that up to a sum of to be reimbursed the same would be done by getting it processed through the principal district judge of the district from where the retired officer is settled and in the event of the claim being above such claim would be processed by the law department with the approval of the finance department and thereafter it would be settled in favour of the concerned retired officer. insofar as the said stand of the state government is concerned we do not find any scope to interfere with it. we only state and direct that even while the law department is entitled to process the claim for reimbursement over and above with the approval of the finance department the said exercise should be carried out within $$$$ days from the date the claim is raised by the retired judicial officer. mr. sunil fernandes learned counsel appearing on behalf of the state of jammu and kashmir submitted that the said grievance as expressed in this application / $$$ will be considered and complied with within a period of weeks from $$$$. the said stand taken on behalf of the state of jammu and kashmir is recorded and the state is directed to extend the medical facilities as per justice shetty commission 's recommendation contained in para.read with paras.of volume iii within weeks from the date of production of a copy of this order. ms. $$$ learned counsel undertakes to appear for the state of maharashtra on behalf of mr. $$$. standing counsel for the state of maharashtra and accepts notice in i.a. no. and seeks time to file reply to the compliance chart as well within weeks. weeks ' time for filing the reply is granted. as far as union territory of puducherry and nct of delhi are concerned there were grievances mentioned in paragraph a b an c of the compliance chart. as far as prayers a and b are concerned it is submitted by counsel for both sides that the same has been sorted out and therefore the said grievances no longer survives. the grievance mentioned in prayer c relates to commutation of pension which has been restricted to % to the union territory of puducherry and nct of delhi instead of % of the pension as is in vogue in all other states. in fact there was an order as early as on.of this court directing the union territories as well as the central government to enhance the commutation level from % to % but yet the same has not been implemented so far. therefore we direct the respective union territory of puducherry and nct of delhi as well as the ministry of law and justice to implement the direction for enhancing the commutation of pension from % to % and pass appropriate orders for that purpose within weeks from the date of production of a copy of this order. in view of the above i.a. stands disposed of.i.a. nos. & in i.a. no. application for intervention is allowed. this application is at the instance of the orissa retired judges association which seeks for prayer as against the state of orissa for a direction to revise the pension of $$$$ and $$$$ pensioners / retired judicial officers at % of the minimum pay of the post held at the time of their retirement as revised from time to time irrespective of the number of qualifying $$$$ of service as recommended in para.chapter of justice shetty commission dated.. before considering the said prayer at the very outset we wish to clarify that the prescription in.intend to ensure that it should be read to the effect that the minimum of the revised pension of the retired judicial officers should be % of the pay of the post held at the time of their retirement as revised from time to time. in other words if by virtue of the exercise of revising the pension of a retired judicial officer prior to.in the revised scale of pay by any chance the pension gets reduced below % of the revised scale the minimum revised pension should not fall below % of the corresponding revised scale. in the same breath it must be stated that if such revision results in more than % in the revised scale such higher pension in the revised scale corresponding to the pre -revised pension which was last drawn pay of the retired judicial officer should be protected. if once we understand the implication of para.to such categories of judicial officers there is no difficulty in directing the state government to apply the said prescription in para.and work out the pension payable to the judicial officers falling under the said paragraph without reference to the number of qualifying $$$$ of service for working out the revised pension payable to them. clarifying the said position with reference to the applicability of para.the state of orissa is directed to work out the revised pension payable to those who fall under paragraph.and pay the same accordingly. the respondent / state of orissa is directed to carry out the said exercise and implement the same expeditiously preferably within months.i.a. since it is reported that identical prayer is subject matter of consideration in civil writ petition no. of titled h.p. judicial service officers association v. state of $$$ and ors.before the high court of $$$ we are of the view that the parties should be relegated to work out their remedy in the said writ petition and await the outcome of the said writ petition. adjourned. the applicant is permitted to move the high court for expeditious hearing of the writ petition.i.a. $$$ counsel appearing for the high court of jharkhand seeks time to file reply. $$$ if any be filed within weeks.i.a. $$$ counsel for the applicant seeks to withdraw this application reserving his liberty to work out the remedy before the high court. the i.a. is permitted to be withdrawn.i.a. and. granting liberty to the applicants to approach the high court these applications stand dismissed as withdrawn.i.a. be taken up along with i.a..