v.n. khare c.j. the respondent herein is a sole proprietor of a $$$ firm in ahmedabad gujarat. of the statutory functions assigned to the appellant herein is to get the accounts of public sector undertakings and governments concerns audited by the $$$. the audit work of the government and public sector undertakings is assigned to only those $$$ firms which are enrolled on the panel maintained by the appellant. in may the appellant through an advertisement invited applications from the firms of the $$$ for the purpose of empanelment for audit of government companies. the aforesaid advertisement stipulated that excepting the states of $$$ jammu & kashmir assam manipur meghalaya nagaland and $$$ only the partnership firm of the $$$ were eligible for enrollment on the panel and the proprietary firms of the $$$ were made ineligible either to apply or to be empanelled for being assigned audit work of the government companies. however in several states the proprietary firm based on those states was made eligible for being brought on the panel for audit work of government companies and concerns. it would be appropriate at this stage to extract the relevant clause and sub -clause d of clause to the advertisement which runs as under:". particular reference is invited to instructions to for filling up the form and the footnote to co. proprietary firms based in the states listed therein only need apply. the proforma should be signed by a partner on behalf of the firm.. proprietary firms of f.c.as. with registered offices in the following states only are being considered for audits in those states $$$ jammu & kashmir assam manipur meghalaya nagaland $$$ emphasis supplied)the respondent herein submitted an application for enrolment on the panel but the same was rejected on account of the fact that his firm was not a partnership firm but a proprietary concern. aggrieved the respondent filed a writ petition under article of the constitution challenging the exclusion of the proprietary concerns from their empanelment as being discriminatory arbitrary and violative of article of the constitution. of the reliefs prayed for runs as under:". that the petitir therefore prays that the honorable court may be pleased to issue in appropriate writ order or direction declaring and setting aside the policy of the respondent which excludes the proprietary firm of f.c.as with registered office in the states other than the states of orissa jammu & kashmir assam manipur meghalaya nagaland and $$$ as mentid in the advertisement at annexure -b as unconstitutional illegal null and void and restraining the respondent permanently from adopting the said policy and not considering the firm of the petitir for the purpose of empanelment as per annexure -b"2. the said writ petition came up for hearing before a learned single judge of the high court of gujarat who by a judgment and order on.allowed the writ petition. the learned single judge was of the view that the policy followed by the appellant was unreasonable and that such sub -classification had no real nexus with the objects sought to be achieved. the learned single judge while holding that the exclusion of proprietary concern from being enrolled on the panel is discriminatory issued following direction... hence it would be just and proper to direct the respondent to include the name of the petitir in the panel as stated above. it is also made clear that even in future as and when the respondent issues public notices inviting applications for empanelment in connection with entrustment of audit work of government companies the respondent is enjoined to see that it does not insist in continuing the artificial sub -classification of chartered accountants who are carrying on profession as $$$ in partnership...with costs. the appellant filed $$$ before the division bench of the high court but the same was dismissed. it is against the said judgment and order of the high court the appellant is before us. it was first contended by learned counsel for the appellant that the appellant 's decision to invite the applications exclusively from partnership firms was a matter of policy and therefore beyond the pale of review by this court. this argument has no substance. it must be borne in mind that there is difference between framing of a policy which is an administrative function and an exercise of statutory functions. the function of the $$$ and auditor general in respect of appointment of auditors for government corporations and public sector undertakings is statutorily assigned under the companies act and it can not then be urged that the $$$ and auditor general is free to act untrammelled and unreasonably. whenever the cag appoints an auditor for audit of government corporations and public sector undertakings under the companies act he exercises statutory powers under the companies act and such an exercise of power manifestly is a statutory function and not a matter of policy. it was then contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that the policy of empanelment of partnership firm of $$$ by the appellant was on account of the fact that the partnership firm of $$$ have been found more efficient and in better position to carry out the statutory audit in view of the continuity accumulation of experience and facilitating adherence to time schedule for completion of audit work than a sole proprietary firm of the $$$ and as such the partnership firm of the $$$ was a class in itself and a valid classification for the purposes of article of the constitution. it was also urged in this context that the said classification would be seen to pass the test of reasonableness on account of the intelligible differentia between partnership firms on the hand and proprietary concerns on the other in terms of factors such as size flexibility and continuity. it was also submitted that the said differentia bore a reasonable nexus to the object which was sought to be achieved by the impugned advertisement namely the efficiency and effective auditing of government companies. to substantiate the point reference was made to such instances as the ability of partner to substitute or supplement another in an exigency the continuity of the partnership firm normally assured upon the demise of of the partners if not in law then in practice the inability of a proprietary concern to meet the audit deadlines stipulated by sections and of the companies act and the usual practice of private companies relying on partnerships largely to the exclusion of proprietary firms. the aforesaid argument raises the question as to whether the sub -classification of partnership firms stands the test of reasonableness on the touchstone of article. it is not disputed that the $$$ having qualification are eligible for being considered for entrustment of audit work for public sector undertaking or the government concerns. once it is accepted that these $$$ are qualified and eligible for the audit work and also are eligible for being brought on the panel of audit work for public sector undertakings and government concerns there appears no valid reason why the impugned advertisement has created a sub -classification from the general class of eligible $$$ which relates to a smaller group of $$$ who form partnership concerns only. the appellant insists that it is only a smaller group of $$$ firms that would be eligible for being brought on the panel for audit of public sector undertakings or government concerns. the audit work of public sector undertaking no doubt is to be done by the qualified and efficient $$$. once a person is qualified experience and efficient it is difficult to understand how he could be discriminated against only for the reason that he has chosen to act alone in the professional career and has not been able to form a partnership firm. the efficiency as pointed out by the high court springs from the personal experience proficiency and personal capacities. it is therefore not possible to link these characteristics and professional acumen to a person or persons in a firm alone. a single individual as an auditor in a proprietary concern can have such characteristics and professional acumen by himself and also through the assistance of experienced auditor who could be in his services as efficient as any partnership firm. it is often seen in many cases that some of the partners of the partnership firm are sleeping partners with no professional duties to discharge. a partnership concern is not a legal entity like company it is a group of individual partners. in a partnership firm it is the partner who will be assisted in carrying out the work but quite remains the eligible $$$. it is the same situation as in a proprietary concern where a $$$ would be carrying on audit work all -in -. merely because some of the $$$s have formed a partnership firm it can not be assumed that they become more efficient for carrying out audit work than the individual $$$ who forms proprietary concern. it is therefore evident that the appellant himself erroneously assumed that the partnership firms are more efficient than the proprietary concern in the matter of audit of accounts of the public sector undertakings or of the government concerns. a useful analogy may be drawn wit the experience of the legal profession. it could not be justifiably argued that the quality of the legal services rendered by a senior advocate is compromised by virtue of the fact that he is the sole and ultimate repository of knowledge and responsibility in a given matter. nor could it reasonably be said that a client would be put to unnecessary risk by being compelled to sink or swim wit the solitary lawyer. personal experience and integrity are the essential attributes of every successful professional and they are the virtues that win $$$$ for the client whether it is a corporation seeking an audit of its accounts or an individual seeking a remedy in court. a clear line of command is also known to prevent a diffusion of responsibility. as such a chartered accountant can not be discriminated against merely because he elected to invest his professional expertise in a proprietary concern rather than to express it in the form of a partnership firm. in any event it would not follow as a categorical imperative that a partnership in better placed for auditing government concerns simply because minds are better than. there could be several instances when a partnership firm which is ostensibly an association of contributing individuals is in actual fact found to consist of a solitary working partner who may for the purpose of securing tax benefits or for other reasons choose to form an alliance with sundry uninterested persons or sleeping partners. in such a scenario it would be fallacious to attribute a greater capacity to partnership firms than to proprietary concerns simply on account of the nomenclature or numbers involved. for the aforesaid reasons the classification between proprietary and partnership firms is arbitrary and unfair and accordingly falls on the anvil of article of the constitution. it was also urged that the proprietary firms of $$$ have been allowed empanelment in certain states namely in the states of orissa jammu & kashmir assam manipur meghalaya nagaland and $$$ out of necessity and exigency and it would be not in public interest to allot audit work of government concerns to partnership firms from outside the state and therefore there was no discrimination involved in empanelment of proprietary concern in such states. we find this submission inconsistent with the earlier submission that the proprietary concern although qualified are not suitable for considerable task of auditing public sector enterprises. either proprietary concerns are suitable and therefore eligible or they are not. if the proprietary concern of $$$ are really inefficient there appears no reason why they have been made eligible to audit the government and public sector undertakings in the aforesaid states. further if there was a paucity of partnership firm of $$$ in a given state the services of partnership firm of $$$ in a given state the services of partnership firm who were said to be efficient based on in other states could be taken. under such circumstances we are of the view that the impugned notification does not stand the test of article of the constitution. for the aforesaid reasons we do not find any merit in the appeal. it fails and is accordingly dismissed. there shall be no order as to costs.