. the petitirs have approached this court seeking emergent reliefs in relation to the extreme air pollution in the national capital region hereinafter ncr. we have heard mr. k.k. venugopal and ms. vibha datta makhija learned senior counsel for the petitirs and mr. c.a. sundaram learned senior counsel for the respondent. the petitir has sought wide ranging reliefs against the use of fireworks including fire crackers prevention of harmful crop burning dumping of malba and further steps towards environmental purity. we have however restricted this order to grant of interim relief in respect of fireworks. the primary contention of the petitirs is that the use of fireworks in the ncr has posed a serious problem to the inability of the air during diwali and the wedding season. according to the petitirs the problem has reached proportions in the ncr which are not tolerable and are causing immense harm to the peace well -being and health both physical and mental. in fairness we must say that there was no serious opposition to the impact of fireworks on the ambient air and the unhealthy effects of fireworks on it. the opposition was mainly about the total banning of fireworks in all circumstances. the onset of $$$$ and the festival / marriage season this year presented to the residents of ncr severe concerns regarding the air quality standards. according to reports the air quality standards in $$$$ were the worst in the world. it is reported that the pm.levels recorded where beyond scale values see india 's air quality among world 's worst over $$$$ report. $$$$ $$$. the report indicates that hour average of pm.levels in south delhi in were % higher than on of. $$$$ after diwali these levels were twice as high as $$$$ after diwali in crossing âµ/m which is times above the who 's standards or levels considered safe. shockingly on of.delhi woke up to an .level of over of the highest levels recorded the world over and times above who standards. the report further states that the who guideline for .levels is âµ/m and with an annual average pm.level of âµ/m delhi 's air is the worst among global megacities with dense populations. we have particularly referred to the pm.levels because of the extreme effects and near invisibility of this type of particulate matter. pm.or particulate matter.pm.refers to tiny particles or droplets in the air that are and half microns or less in width. it may be noted that the widths of the larger particles in the pm.size range would be about times smaller than that of a human hair. these particles primarily emanate from vehicle exhausts and other operations that involve the burning of fuels such as wood heating oil or coal and of course use of fire crackers. in india air quality standards are measured in terms of the air quality index hereinafter aqi. the aqi was launched in india on.by the ministry of environment and forests. according to the press release of the press information bureau of the same date it consists of a comprehensive set of parameters to monitor and asses the air quality. the aqi considers pollutants pm pm.no so co o nh and pb and based on the levels of these pollutants categories of aqi ranging from good to severe have been prescribed. the index also suggests the health effects of the pollution category wise. the gradation of aqi and its health impact is extracted below:. reports indicate that the aqi in delhi was much above the severe standard shooting off the aqi mark on $$$$ this $$$$. on $$$$ after diwali it was more than times the safe limits see delhi 's pollution levels peaks at -times safe limits.the hindu. the adverse health effects of these hazardous levels of pollution are only too evident from the table given above. we do not intend to refer to the multiplicity of reports and data on this front. the hazardous levels of air pollution in $$$$ has spared very few from its ill effects. the life of the citizens of ncr was brought to a virtual standstill not to speak about the plight of the of mute flora and fauna in ncr. schools were declared shut denizens of the city advised to stay indoors construction activities stopped power stations shut and ban imposed on burning of garbage and agricultural waste. the fall in air quality has had a significant impact on people 's lifestyle as well. the rising costs to protect against air pollution are substantial. it has come to our notice that people are queuing up to purchase protective masks and air purification systems in the wake of dense smog all over the ncr. in short the capital was smogged into an environmental emergency of unseen proportions. the adverse effects of these extreme levels of air pollution spare no -the young the old the infirm and even the future generations. a study of the data of the global health depository of the world health organization reveals that india has the world 's highest death rate from chronic respiratory diseases and that about.people in india die $$$$ due to indoor and outdoor pollution see $$$ up to an air pollution problem. it can not ignore.the new york times. the kolkata -based chittaranjan national cancer institute cnci in a study commissid and handed over to the central pollution control board found that key indicators of respiratory health lung function to palpitation vision to blood pressure of children in delhi between and years of age were worse off than their counterparts elsewhere. it also found that more than percent of the school children suffer from lung damage see landmark study lies buried.the indian express. we note with apprehension that there are nascent studies that suggest that pollution can lower children 's i.q.hurt their test scores and increase the risks of autism epilepsy diabetes and even adult -onset diseases like multiple sclerosis see holding your breath in india.the new york times. it has been brought to our notice that the severe air pollution in the ncr is leading to multiple diseases and other health related issues amongst the people. it is said that the increase in respiratory diseases like asthma lung cancer bronchitis etc. is primarily attributable to the worsening air quality in the ncr. the damage being caused to people 's lungs is said to be irreversible. other health related issues like allergies temporary deafness are also on the rise. various experts have pointed towards multiple adverse effects of air pollution on human health like premature deaths rise in mortality rates palpitation loss of vision arthritis heart ailments cancer etc. when we refer to these extreme effects we are not merely referring to the inconvenience caused to people but to abject deprivation of a range of constitutionally embedded rights that the residents of ncr ought to have enjoyed. needless to state the grim situation of air quality adversely affected the right to education work health and ultimately the right to life of the citizens and this court is constitutionally bound to address their grave concerns -$$$$ we remind ourselves that this is not the time that this court was impelled into ensuring clean air for the citizens of the capital region see m.c. $$$ v. union of india manu / $$$ / sc/07/$$$$ $$$$( scc and manu / sc/0/$$$$manu / sc/0/$$$$ scc m.c. $$$ v. union of india manu / sc//$$$$manu / sc//$$$$ ) scc m.c. $$$ v. union of india manu / sc//9manu / sc//9 scc. during the festival -marriage season in delhi that is $$$$ a report suggests that more than recognized and other dangerous forms of firecrackers are used see fireworks make diwali a dangerous festival for all.down to earth. these fireworks release a deadly concoction of fumes into an almost -still $$$$ air in delhi causing extreme air pollution during this time. these fire crackers apart from causing acute air pollution also cause severe noise pollution. a study suggests that fireworks emit fine particles of various elements like copper barium strontium $$$ and potassium all of which are used to provide the colour and glitter to fireworks see the impact of fireworks on airborne particles atmospheric environment volume issue pages -. the latest report by the central pollution control board cpcb on the ambient air quality during the diwali period shows that air pollution across the capital has reached record levels and has become intolerable. we find that the air quality in ncr is mostly poor as per the standards prescribed by the government of india but it becomes much worse during diwali. the concentrations of pm.and pm which are indicators of air quality have shown considerable increase in the region. the following tables show the actual pm.and pm levels in delhi during the diwali period according to the cpcb report. the cpcb report indicates that air pollution levels across the region rises by about -times on diwali as a consequence of burning of fireworks. numerous accidents take place due to unregulated manufacture storage and transport of fireworks resulting in substantial damage to life and property. further unsupervised bursting of fireworks also leads to many accidents where unfortunately most victims are children. they are a source of both air pollution and noise pollution. something that is meant to be a celebration seems to be destroying the peace and tranquility which is necessary for rest. grievance was made before us about the even a lakh of crackers on string going off at and several such strings going off in the neighborhood totally unmindful of the aged the tender and the ill. all this firework even that which is not noisy leaves the ambient air thick with noxious particles. marriage processions barats passing through an area generated the same kind of noise and leave behind the same kind of air by the use of fire crackers. it is not necessary to speculate if those who suffer send their good wishes for the event or to those celebrating diwali in this way. we are conscious that we are dealing with time honoured ways of celebrating certain occasions. the petitirs and every member of the bench and the bar also celebrate in the same way. but does that justify the continuance of this manner of celebration when the quality of air in the region is so poor and injurious to health and well being and is destroying essential compnts of the freedom to live a healthy life in any case till the quality of air improves we do not pronounce finally on this question at this stage. it is however certain that now when the air quality index in the ncr is abysmally and threateningly severe allowing free trade in fireworks which is a major source of noise and air pollution and is causing immense harm to the lives and health of citizens and allowing availability of such fireworks or explosives constitutes a serious invasion of the freedoms and rights conferred on citizens by part iii of the constitution of india. such an invasion is all the more deleterious towards the rights and freedom of the poor and the underprivileged who must breathe such air without any means of protecting themselves. there is no doubt that protecting citizens including those who use fireworks by making these unavailable in the market would require the suspension of trade of a miniscule section of the population. maybe they have acquired stocks for sale or obtained credit for their business. we are however of the view that balancing the vital interests of the vast majority of citizens against the commercial interests of a few the balance must heavily tilt in favour of citizens in general. we are aware that we are only issuing interim directions and much is left to be heard discussed and said about the rival claims and contentions. what is however indisputable is that the harmful effects of fireworks on the ambient air and the lungs eyes and ears of people. what is also obvious is the extreme nuisance noise the fireworks cause to citizens particularly the ailing and the aged. therefore though much can be argued as always about the significance and even joy of bursting fireworks. but at the same prima facie a just constitutional balance must overwhelmingly prioritize the harmful effects of this hazardous air on present and future generations irreversible and imperceptible as they are over the immediate commercial constraints of the manufacturers and suppliers of fireworks. secondly this court recognizes that the duty to ensure a healthy environment not only falls on the state in terms of article of the constitution of india but also on all citizens under article of the constitution. this court has previously held that fundamental duties in part iv a of the constitution could be a guiding factor in testing the reasonableness of restrictions under article of the constitution of india see state of gujarat v. mirzapur moti kureshi kassab jamat manu / sc//$$$$manu / sc//$$$$ scc para the principle of inter -generational equity recognized and applied by this court in a number of decisions beaconing us to the health and needs of the future generation also favours the issuance of interim directions. lastly the precautionary principle affirmed by this court in vellore citizens welfare forum v. union of india manu / sc/08/$$$$manu / sc/08/$$$$ scc mandates that where there are threats of serious and irreversible damage lack of scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing measures to prevent environmental degradation. we thus consider it inappropriate that explosives which are used as fireworks should be available in the market in the ncr till further orders. the mechanism of the law in this regard is clear. rule of the explosive rules framed under the explosives act provides for the manner in which licenses issued under the explosives act to store and sell explosives could be suspended or cancelled. sub -rule thereof specifically confers on the central government a power to suspend or cancel a license if it considers that it is in public interest. this provision also makes it clear that an opportunity to hear the licensee could be dispensed with if the central government considers that in public interest. this court finds that the grave air quality situation in ncr is such case where this court can intervene and suspend the licenses to store and sell fireworks in the ncr. we direct the central government to:(i suspend all such licenses as permit sale of fireworks wholesale and retail within the territory of ncr.the suspension shall remain in force till further orders of this court.no such licenses shall be granted or renewed till further orders. in addition to the above we direct the cpcb to study and prepare a report on the harmful effects of the materials which are currently being used in the manufacture of fireworks. the report shall be submitted within $$$$ months to this court.deepawali monitoring report 0suspension and revocation or cancellation of licence.every licence granted under these rules shall--(i stand cancelled $$$ the licensee has ceased to have any right for the lawful possession over the licensed premises the licensee is convicted and sentenced under any criminal offences or ordered to execute under $$$ of the code of criminal procedure of a bond for keeping peace for good behaviour. ii stand cancelled if the no -objection certificate is cancelled by the authority issuing the same or district magistrate or the state government in accordance with rule. be liable to be suspended or cancelled by an order of the licensing authority for any contravention of the act or these rules or of any condition contained in such licence or by order of the central government if it is satisfied that there are sufficient grounds for doing so provided that before suspending or cancelling a licence under this rule the holder of the licence shall be given an opportunity of being heard. the suspension or cancellation shall take effect from the date specified therein. an order of suspension or revocation of a licence shall be deemed to have been served if sent by post to the address of the licensee entered in the licence. the suspension of a licence shall not debar the holder of the licence from applying for the renewal. notwithstanding anything contained in sub -rule an opportunity of being heard may not be given to the holder of the licence before his licence is suspended or cancelled in $$$ where the licence is suspended by a licensing authority as an interim measure for violation of any of the provisions of the act or these rules or of any conditions contained in such licence and in his opinion such violation is likely to cause imminent danger to the public provided that where a licence is so suspended the licensing authority shall give the holder of the licence an opportunity of being heard before the order of suspension is confirmed or where the licence is suspended or cancelled by the central government if that government considers that in the public interest or in the interest of the security of the state such opportunity should not be given. a licensing authority or the central government suspending or cancelling a licence shall record its reason for so doing in writing.