b.n. srikrishna j.civil appeal no. of. on.the appellant filed an application for refund claim of rs.after the final assessment was completed. the assistant commissioner of central excise issued a show cause notice dated.as to why the claim should not be rejected for non -compliance with section of the central excise act. after considering the reply filed by the appellant the assistant commissioner of central excise by his order dated th july rejected the refund claim of the appellant on the ground that the refund claim had been made beyond the period of limitation and that appellant was unable to show that the amount of excise duty for which the refund was claimed had not been passed on to any other person. on appeal the commissioner of central excise in his order dated th june observed that on the date on which the assistant commissioner of central excise made the above order i..the assessment was only provisional and that the assessment was finalised only on.. in the circumstances the commissioner was of the view that the refund claim was not time barred. following the law laid down by this court in mafatlal industries ltd. and ors. v. union of india and ors.manu / sc/0/7manu / sc/0/7 he held that the concept of unjust enrichment would not be attracted on finalisation of provisional assessments. he consequently allowed the refund claim. on appeal the customs excise and gold control appellate tribunal hereinafter referred to as cegat agreed with the view of the commissioner and dismissed the appeal. hence the department is in appeal before us. in mafatlal industries ltd. supra a bench of learned judges of this court held that refund claims consequent upon the adjustment under $$$ -rule of rule would not be governed by the restrictions of section a or section as the case may be. this court observed vide paragraph as under:"rule -b provides for provisional assessment in situations specified in clauses a and of $$$ -rule. the goods provisionally assessed under $$$ -rule may be cleared for home consumption or export in the same manner as the goods which are finally assessed. sub -rule provides that when the duty leviable on the goods is assessed finally in accordance with the provisions of these rules the duty provisionally assessed shall be adjusted against the duty finally assessed and if the duty provisionally assessed falls short of or is in excess of the duty finally assessed the assessee shall pay the deficiency or be entitled to a refund as the case may be. any recoveries or refunds consequent upon the adjustment under sub -rule of rule will not be governed by section 11a or section as the case may be. in order to get over the situation arising under mafatlal industries ltd supra vide notification no. nt dated.an amendment was made in sub -rule of rule by adding a proviso thereto. the effect of the proviso is that even after finalisation of the provisional assessment under rule if it is found that an assesses is entitled to refund such refund shall not be made to him except in accordance with the procedure established under sub -section of section of the act. there is no dispute that the refund claim in this case was made much prior to the addition of the proviso in sub -rule of rule . on the date on which the refund claim was made the law applicable was the law as declared by this court in mafatlal industries ltd. supra which we have reproduced above. however it is contended by the learned counsel $$$ for the department that the claim of refund would be governed by the proviso introduced in sub -rule of rule and that as a consequence the restrictions in section 11a and section with regard to the procedure for refund would apply to the case of the appellant. the same question came up for consideration of this court in sinkhai synthetics & chemicals $$$. ltd. v. c.c.e.aurangabadmanu / sc/024/2002manu / sc/024/2002. this court took the view that the case would be governed by the rule laid down in mafatlal industries ltd. supra this view has been reiterated in a subsequent judgment of this court in c.a. no. of commissioner of central excise meerut v. star paper mills limited upholding the view of the tribunal that the refund claim of the appellant before the court was justified. $$$ fairly concedes that the proviso introduced in sub -rule of rule can not be said to be retrospective in operation. he however contends that on the date on which the proviso was brought into force i..the refund claim was still pending with the departmental authorities and therefore it had to be adjudicated in accordance with the law as it became enforceable from.. in our view this contention can not be accepted. merely because the departmental authorities took a long time to process the application for refund the right of the appellant does not get defeated by the subsequent amendment made in sub -rule of rule . the commissioner of central excise and the cegat were therefore justified in holding that the claim for refund made by the appellant had to be decided according to the law laid down by this court in mafatlal industries ltd. supra and would not be governed by the proviso to sub -rule of rule . in the result we find no merit in appeal. the appeal is accordingly dismissed. however there shall be no order as to costs.civil appeal nos. and -11/20027. in all these appeals the question which arises for our consideration is identical. the refund claims were made pursuant to the finalisation of provisional assessment orders and prior to.i. the date on which the proviso to sub -rule of rule8. came into force. in our view therefore all these cases would be governed by the rule in mafatlal industries limited supra namely that the restrictions in section 11a and section would not apply to refund claims consequent upon finalisation of provisional assessment orders. hence these appeals are dismissed. no costs.