l. nageswara rao j. these appeals are filed against the judgment of the high court of uttarakhand at nainital by which a direction was issued to restrict the selection of assistant prosecuting officers only to the number of posts that were advertised. an advertisement was issued by the uttarakhand public service commission referred to as the respondent on.for appointment to the posts of assistant prosecuting officers. the number of posts notified were. it was mentid in the advertisement that the number of posts may be increased or decreased by the state government. a preliminary examination was contemplated in case there were a large number of applications. it was mentid in the advertisement that the $$$$ of recruitment was a period of months commencing from $$$$ of the calendar $$$$. as a large number of candidates applied a preliminary examination was conducted on.the result of which was declared on.. the third respondent who was an applicant filed an application under the right to information act seeking information about the number of posts for which the preliminary examination was conducted. the respondent responded stating that the number of vacancies for which the selection was being held was. the third respondent filed a writ petition in the high court of uttarakhand at nainital for a direction that only posts of assistant prosecuting officers which were advertised on.should be filled up. a counter was filed by the respondent stating that additional posts of assistant prosecuting officers were created by an order dated.. it was also stated in the counter that a requisition for additional posts of assistant prosecuting officers was sent to the respondent. it was further stated that there was acute shortage of assistant prosecuting officers and hence there was need for filling up of vacant posts of assistant prosecuting officers without delay. the high court allowed the writ petition. the high court relied on uttar pradesh prosecuting officers service rules referred to as the rules to hold that the selection pursuant to an advertisement can be only for clear vacancies and anticipated vacancies but not for future vacancies. referring to the definition of $$$$ of recruitment in the rules the high court held that vacancies that arose between 1st of july and th of june al can be filled up. the high court directed that selection should be confined to only posts of assistant prosecuting officers. a further direction was given by the high court to the respondent to commence the process of selection for the additional vacancies which were requisitid by the letter dated.. the appellants would have been selected and appointed as assistant prosecuting officers if the selection was for posts. they are aggrieved by the judgment of the high court. they have sought permission to file the above appeals which was granted on.. we heard mr. harin p. raval and ms. $$$ learned senior counsels appearing for the appellants and mr. $$$ counsel appearing for the respondent. mr. harin raval submitted that there was only assistant prosecuting officer working in the state of uttarakhand on the date of advertisement dated.. mr. raval took us through the material on record to show that more than posts were available on the date of advertisement. he referred to the condition in the advertisement which enabled the state government to vary the number of vacancies. he also referred to the pleadings to contend that a requisition was made to the respondent for filling up the additional vacancies as well. he submitted that the high court went wrong in allowing the writ petition without taking into account the shortage of assistant prosecuting officers in the state of uttarakhand. mr. $$$ counsel appearing for the state supported the appellants and sought permission to fill up the additional vacancies. candidates were declared successful for being appointed as assistant prosecuting officers by a notification dated.. it is stated in the written submission filed by the respondent that out of candidates joined and were sent for training. candidates out of resigned and the remaining candidates were assigned postings as assistant prosecuting officers. the recruitment to posts of assistant prosecuting officers is governed by the uttar pradesh prosecuting officers service rules. rule defines ' $$$$ of recruitment as a period of months commencing from the 1st day of july of calendar $$$$. the requisition made by the respondent to the respondent on.was for selection of assistant prosecuting officers. the year of recruitment for conducting selection would be between 1st july and th june. as stated earlier only posts were notified in the advertisement. as per the advertisement the government could vary the number of posts to be filled up. such power could have been exercised by the government only to the extent of posts that arose between 1st july and th june. the respondent filed a counter in this court in which it was stated that the advertisement issued on.was for posts and that it was only on.that the government intimated additional posts to be filled up. the letter dated.of the chief secretary state of uttarakhand was relied upon by the appellants to contend that additional vacancies were created and they were available to be filled up. it is clear from the pleadings and the various documents filed by the appellants that no additional posts were created between 1st july and th june. it is significant that the rules refer to $$$$. it is a well -accepted principle of service law that only the number of vacancies that are advertised can be filled up. if the advertisement gives liberty to the government to vary the number of posts such power can not be exercised for filling up future vacancies. if additional posts were created during $$$$ i. between 1st july and th june the government could have directed the respondent to include those posts also in the selection list that was made pursuant to the advertisement dated.. this court in prem singh and ors. v. haryana state electricity board reported in manu / sc/51/$$$$manu / sc/51/$$$$ scc at paragraph held as follows from the above discussion of the case -law it becomes clear that the selection process by way of requisition and advertisement can be started for clear vacancies and also for anticipated vacancies but not for future vacancies. if the requisition and advertisement are for a certain number of posts only the state can not make more appointments then the number of posts advertised even though it might have prepared a select list of more candidates. the state can deviate from the advertisement and make appointments on posts falling vacant thereafter in exceptional circumstances only or in an emergent situation and that too by taking a policy decision in that behalf. even when filling up of more posts than advertised is challenged the court may not while exercising its extra -ordinary jurisdiction invalidate the excess appointments and may mould the relief in such a manner as to strike a just balance between the interest of the state and the interest of persons seeking public employment. what relief should be granted in such cases would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.it was further held by this court that strictly speaking the authorities were not justified in making appointments to posts more than those advertised. this court also found that only actual vacancies were taken into account without considering the anticipated vacancies that were likely to arise due to retirement etc. as appointments were already made taking into account the peculiar facts and circumstances this court approved the appointments beyond those advertised only to the extent of vacancies which arose because of death and retirement etc. the appointments that were made to future vacancies were declared as invalid. pursuant to the directions issued by the high court in the impugned judgment persons were declared selected for appointment. in view of the interim order passed by this court in the above appeals selection to the remaining posts was not held. years have passed after the advertisement was issued on.. a large number of persons would have become eligible for selection to the post of assistant prosecuting officers. they have a right to be considered for appointment guaranteed under $$$ and of the constitution of india. there would be an infraction of such right if the additional posts are not filled up by a fresh selection. the attempt made by the and respondents to fill up the additional posts is contrary to the rules. after a careful consideration of the matter we are of the opinion that the appellants can not be selected and appointed to the additional posts that were not advertised on.and were created after the relevant recruitment year ending on.. we have examined the possibility of granting relief to the appellants by taking into account the facts and circumstances of this case. the appellants participated in the selection which was initially for posts which later increased to posts. they could not be appointed due to the judgment of the high court which directed the selection to be only for posts. in view of there being no fault on the part of the appellants we examined whether we could exercise our judicial discretion to direct their appointments. we realise that any such direction given by us for their appointments would be contrary to the rules. judicial discretion can be exercised by a court only when there are or more possible lawful solutions. in any event courts can not give any direction contrary to the statute or rules made thereunder in exercise of judicial discretion. it will be useful to reproduce from judicial discretion by $$$ which is as follows discretion assumes the freedom to choose among several lawful alternatives. therefore discretion does not exist when there is but lawful option. in this situation the judge is required to select that option and has no freedom of choice. no discretion is involved in the choice between a lawful act and an unlawful act. the judge must choose the lawful act and he is precluded from choosing the unlawful act. discretion on the other hand assumes the lack of an obligation to choose particular possibility among several. as we have held that the selection pursuant to the advertisement dated.should be confined only to posts that were advertised the additional posts that were created after the expiry of $$$$ shall be filled up by issuance of an advertisement afresh. in view of the shortage of assistant prosecuting officers in the state of uttarakhand we direct the authorities to expedite the process of selection. for the aforementioned reasons the judgment of the high court is upheld and the civil appeals are dismissed.