m.b. shah j. leave granted. question involved in this appeal is whether time payment of compensation to a poor agriculturist would be sufficient to meet the future medical expenses it is true that lump -sum compensation contemplating future eventualities can be granted but at the same time is it permissible under the act to grant recurring medical expenses to such a victim whether amendment to the claim petition could be granted at the appellate stage?. before we deal with this question we would narrate a few facts. the appellant a poor agriculturist along with some other persons was travelling in a bullock cart on.which met with an accident with a truck as a result of which he suffered injuries including the injury on right foot and right ankle exposing soft tissues and bs which was subsequently required to be amputated. other persons also sustained injuries and the bullock cart was also damaged. the appellant alongwith other injured persons filed claim application bearing mvc no. of before the claims tribunal chitradurga. the tribunal passed an award dated.granting a sum of rs. for injury pain and suffering rs. for loss of enjoyment of life and rs. for loss of earnings and rs. for medical treatment totaling rs. with interest at the rate of % per annum from the date of application. against that award appellant preferred mfa no. before the high court of karnataka at bangalore. the high court enhanced the compensation and awarded rs. towards the loss of amenities of life loss of future earnings pain and sufferings. apart from this sum it was ordered that the appellant shall be entitled to a further sum of rs. for purchase of artificial leg. it has come on record that the appellant was an agriculturist and that according to the medical evidence he had suffered to per cent permanent disability. the medical evidence further reveals that his right leg was amputated and he was required to change the artificial leg once in to years. before we deal with the question of compensation we would refer to contion which is raised in this appeal.amendment to the claim petition claiming enhanced compensation:-. at the time of hearing of this matter learned counsel for the appellant has filed an application seeking permission to amend the claim petition and for enhancement of claim to the tune of rs. lacs as compensation. before the trial court the claim was only for a sum of rs. lac. the learned counsel for the insurance company conded that the appellant can not be permitted to amend the claim petition and claim enhanced compensation. as against this learned counsel for the appellant submitted that under the act there is no prohibition for amending the claim petition and in any case order rule cpc is applicable to such claim petition under karnataka motor vehicles rules. hence it is the discretion of the court to permit amendment of the claim petition is appropriate case.  under the provisions of motor vehicles act hereinafter referred to as the mv act there is no restriction that compensation could be awarded only up to the amount claimed by the claimant. in an appropriate case where from the evidence brought on record if tribunal court considers that claimant is entitled to get more compensation than claimed the tribunal may pass such award. only embargo is it should be just compensation that is to say it should be neither arbitrary fanciful nor unjustifiable from the evidence. this would be clear by reference to the relevant provisions of the m.v. act. section provides that an application for compensation arising out of an accident involving the death of or bodily injury to persons arising out of the use of motor vehicles or damages to any property of a party so arising or both could be made a by the person who has sustained the injury or by the owner of the property or where death has resulted from the accident by all or any of the legal representatives of the deceased or d by any agent duly authorised by the person injured or all or any of the legal representatives of the deceased as the case may be. under the proviso to sub -section all the legal representatives of the deceased who have not joined as the claimants are to be impleaded as respondents to the application for compensation. other important part of the said section is sub -section which provides that the claims tribunal shall treat any report of accidents forwarded to it under sub -section of section as an application for compensation under this act.hence claims tribunal in appropriate case can treat the report forwarded to it as an application for compensation even though no such claim is made or no specified amount is claimed. sub -section of section read thus:--"8. production of certain certificates licence and permit in certain cases...as soon as any information regarding any accident involving death or bodily injury to any person is recorded or report under this section is completed by a police officer the officer incharge of the police station shall forward a copy of the same within days from the date of recording of information or as the case may be on completion of such report to the claims tribunal having jurisdiction and a copy thereof to the concerned insurer and where a copy is made available to the owner he shall also within days of receipt of such report forward the same to such claims tribunal and insurer. it appears that due importance is not given to sub -section of section which provides that the tribunal shall treat any report of the accidents forwarded to it under sub -section of section as an application for compensation under this act. $$$ section empowers the claims tribunal to make an award determining the amount of compensation which appears to it to be just. therefore only requirement for determining the compensation is that it must be just. there is no other limitation or restriction on its power for awarding just compensation. secondly under section the claims tribunal in holding any inquiry under section is required to follow the rules that are made in this behalf and follow such summary procedure as it thinks fit. in the present case it has been pointed out that rule of karnataka motor vehicles rules empowers the claims tribunal to exercise all or any of the powers vested in a civil court under the provisions of code of civil procedure. rules inter alia makes specific provision that order rule cpc is applicable to such proceedings. in this view of the matter in an appropriate case depending upon the facts and the evidence which has been brought on record and in the interest of justice court may permit amendment of claim petition so as to award enhanced compensation. further for amendment of the pleadings it is settled law that unless it causes injustice to other side or it is not necessary for the purpose of determining real issue between the parties. court would grant amendment. it is also to be stated that under the m.v. act there is no time limit prescribed for claiming compensation. therefore there is no question of enhanced claim being barred by limitation. this court in sheikhupura transport co. ltd. v. northern indian transport insurance co. $$$ / sc/05/$$$ / sc/05/ airsc observed as under:-...the pecuniary loss to the aggrieved party would depend upon data which can not be ascertained accurately but must be necessarily be an estimate or even partly a conjecture..the determination of the question of compensation depends on several imponderables. in the assessment of those imponderables there is likely to be a margin of error... hence as stated earlier it is for the tribunal to determine just compensation from the evidence which is brought on record despite the fact that claimant has not precisely stated the amount of damages of compensation which he is entitled to. if evidence on record justifies passing of such award the claim can not be rejected solely on the ground that claimant has restricted this claim. from of the karnataka motor vehicles rates which is for filing an application for compensation does not provide that claimant should specify his claim amount. it inter alia provides that he should mention his $$$$ income as well as the nature of injury sustained and medical certificates. in case where there is evidence on record justifying the enhanced compensation for the medical treatment which is required because of the injury caused to a claimant due to the accident there is no reason why such amendment or enhanced compensation should not be granted. in such cases there is no question of introducing a new or inconsist cause of action. cause of action and evidence remain the same. only question is -application of law as it stands. mr. p.k. $$$ learned counsel appearing for the insurance company in support of his contion that the tribunal has no jurisdiction to award higher amount of compensation than what is claimed even though it is not likely to cause prejudice to the insurance company heavily relied upon the decision rendered by the full bench of the high court of gujarat in dr. urmila j. $$$ v. $$$ and ors. $$$ / gj/0/00$$$ / gj/0/00 air00guj. in that case the high court after considering relevant decisions on the subject observed thus:--..we may mention that when the claimant feels that he is entitled to more compensation than what is claimed in the petition it is always open to him / her to amend the claim petition and if the same is in consonance with the equity justice and good conscience there is no reason why the claims tribunal should not grant amendment. before compensation more than claimed is awarded the opposite parties should be put to notice the requisite additional issue / issue should be raised and the parties should be permitted to adduce their evidence on the additional issues but if no such opportunity is given the procedure would obviously suffer from material irregularity affecting the decision. from the aforesaid observations it can not be held that there is a bar for the claims tribunal to award the compensation in excess of what is claimed particularly when the evidence which is brought on record is sufficient to pass such award. in cases where there is no evidence on record the court may permit such amendment and allow to raise additional issue and give an opportunity to the parties to produce relevant evidence. in support of her contion the learned counsel for the appellant mrs. $$$ referred to the decision of bombay high court in municipal corporation of greater bombay and anr. v. $$$ and ors. $$$ / mh/0/$$$$$$$ / mh/0/$$$$ acj wherein the court dealt with similar contion and observed thus:--"8. what is further necessary to note is that what gives a cause of action for preferring an application for claim for compensation is the accident by motor vehicle or vehicles and not a particular mtary loss occasid by such accident. while the compensation in all no fault claim cases is fixed and uniform in fault claim cases the losses may vary from case to case. the particular losses are merely the consequence of the accident which is the cause of action. this being so the amounts of compensation claimed are nothing but the particulars of the claim made. by its very nature further the amount of compensation claimed can not always be calculated precisely. in many cases it can at best be a fair estimate... the high court observed that in all such cases it is necessary to keep the doors open for the claimant to make the claims on grounds not stated earlier or for more amounts under heads already specified in the application. the aforesaid decision of the bombay high court was relied upon and referred to by the orissa high court in mulla md. $$$. $$$ and anr. $$$ / or/0/$$$ / or/0/ and g.b. $$$ j. as he was observed that the expression just compensation would obviously mean what is fair moderate and reasonable and awardable in the proved circumstances of a particular case and the expression which appears to it to be just vests a wide discretion in the tribunal in the matter of determining of compensation. $$$ the court referred to the decision in sheikhupura transport co. ltd. supra and held that the pecuniary loss to the aggrieved party would depend upon data which can not be ascertained accurately but must necessarily be an estimate or even partly a conjecture and if this is so then it will be unreasonable to expect the party to state precisely the amount of damages or compensation that it would be entitled to. the court also held that there are no fetters on the power of the tribunal to award compensation in excess of the amount which is claimed in the application. similarly the high court of punjab and $$$ in $$$ and ors. v. state of haryana and ors. $$$ / ph/055/$$$ / ph/055/ observed that the grant of just and fair compensation is statutory responsibility of the court and if on the facts the court finds that the claimant is entitled to higher compensation the court should allow the claimant to amend his prayer and allow proper compensation. for the reasons discussed above in our view under the m.v. act there is no restriction that tribunal / court can not award compensation amount exceeding the claimed amount. the function of the tribunal / court is to award just compensation which is reasonable on the basis of evidence produced on record. further in such cases there is no question of claim becoming time barred or it can not be contended that by enhancing the claim there would be change of cause of action. it is also to be stated that as provided under sub -section to section even report submitted to the claims tribunal under sub -section of section can be treated as an application for compensation under the m.v. act. if required in appropriate cases court may permit amendment to the claim petition.is it permissible under the act to award compensation by installments or recurring compensation to meet the future medical expenses of the victim?----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------. to an agriculturist loss of leg vitally affects not only his working capacity but also his livelihood. in this context lord denning m.r. in lim poh choo v. camden and islington area healthy authority all er quoted with approval the observations of parke b. which are as under:-'scarcely any sum could compensate a labouring man for the loss of a limb yet you do not in such a case give him enough to maintain him for life..you are not to consider the value of existence as if you were bargaining with an annuity office..i advise you to take a reasonable view of the case and give what you consider fair compensation. however it is to be clearly understood that m.v. act does not provide for passing of further award after final award is passed. therefore in a case where injury to a victim requires periodical medical expenses fresh award can not be passed or previous award can not be reviewed when the medical expenses are incurred after finalisation of the compensation proceedings. hence only alternative is that at the time of passing of final award tribunal / court should consider such eventuality and fix compensation accordingly. no can suggest that it is improper to take into account expenditure genuinely and reasonably required to be incurred for future medical expenses. future medical expenses required to be incurred can be determined only on the basis of fair guess -work after taking into account increase in the cost of medical treatment. this position is made clear in union carbide corporation and ors. v. union of india and ors. $$$ / sc/0058/$$$ / sc/0058/ airsc48 where this court observed as under:-...in an action for negligence damages must be and are assessed once and for all at the trial of such an issue. even if it is found later that the damage suffered was much greater than was originally supposed no further action could be brought. it is well settled rule of law that damages resulting from and the same cause of action must be assessed and recovered once and for all. actions therefore will not lie against the same defendant for personal injury sustained in the same accident. further compensation to a victim of a motor vehicle accident or in case of a fatal accident to the legal representatives is awarded under heads namely special damages -which are suffered by the victim or the legal representatives and general damages -which include compensation for pain and sufferings loss of amenities earning capacity and prospective expenses including expenses for medical treatment. with regard to the part of the damages that is special damages suffered by the victim or the legal representative it can be easily proved on the basis of the evidence which is in possession of the claimant. however with regard to the part-- general damages / compensation it would be a matter of conjectures depending on number of imponderables. in lim poh choo case supra lord denning observed as under:-..the practice is now established and can not be gain said that in personal injury cases the award of damages is assessed under main heads special damages in the shape of my actually expended cost of future nursing and attendance and medical expenses pain and suffering and loss of amenities th loss of future earnings. while calculating such damages the tribunal / court is required to have some guess work taking into account the inflation factor. this aspect is well discussed by m.j. rao j. as he then was in p. satyanarayana v. i. babu rajendra prasad and anr. $$$ / ap/0/8$$$ / ap/0/8 acj. the learned judge has given a classification or injuries a useful guide and has observed thus:-"4. if a collection of cases on the quantum of damages is to be useful it must necessarily be classified in such a way that comparable cases can be grouped together. no doubt no cases are alike but still it is possible to make a broad classification which enables to bring comparable awards together. such classifications have been made by $$$ in his motor claims cases $$$ in his employer 's liability and kemp & kemp in their quantum of damages. munkman p.. cases relating to injuries have been classified into categories i.a total works partial wrecks and where limits and eyes and other specific parts of the body are lost which can be sub -grouped according to the type of limb lost and smaller injuries which can not be specifically grouped but for which compensation can be assessed by comparison with injuries of loss of limbs e.g.comparing permanent wrist injuries with loss of hand or comparing a temporary broken arm with the loss of the arm etc. such comparisons are often made by judges. munkman points out that in america mr. melvin m. $$$ an eminent lawyer classified injuries into categories as back traumatic amputation of leg paralysis hand or arm off death multiple fractures $$$ personality change blindness brain injury and occupation diseases. by awards say for blindness had risen to dollars munkman pp. -. $$$$ after years these awards must have g up further. the total wreck ' category comprises of cases of complete incapacity for work and virtually no enjoyment of life e.g.paralysis severe brain injury causing insanity multiple injuries leaving the victim a total cripple. the partial wreek cases are also cases where the entire body is affected and not set of limbs al as in the category. cases of brain injuries resulting in a personality change and multiple injuries with grave disfigurement fall in this category. the category does not present much difficulty for sub -classification. the category deals with minor injuries in a limb which be compared with major injuries in the same limb.past inflation relevancy of date of accident:. the dates of accident resulting in similar injuries have great relevancy. for example if a particular conventional sum of say rs. was awarded towards the non -pecuniary damages of loss of expectation of life loss or amenities and pain and suffering all put together in a case of amputation of a leg consequent to an accident in the award to be made for an identical loss $$$$ would have to be upgraded from the value to its value in having regard to the corrosion of the value of the rupee. this can be d by comparing the cost of living index in with that in. $$$ worth on negligence edn.para says the conventional figures must keep pace with the times in which we live. he says that this can be well illustrated by considering the class of injury resulting say in the loss of sight in eye and the conventional sum lay around â£ about a quarter of a century ago but $$$$ in it will probably exceed â£ or it ought to do. kemp & kemp on damages chapter para say if a court is seeking to make a comparison with some earlier award for non -pecuniary losses and if by the date of the comparison the currency in which the earlier award was made has declined by say per cent must surely double the earlier award in order to make a valid comparison. the authors have compiled tables at paras and showing the current level of general damages for pain and suffering and loss of amenities in cases of severe injury and the other showing similar $$$$ and have compared whether courts are or are not keeping pace with inflation. the authors ask why tort -feasors al as a class should be excused from paying the value -based price in walker v. john mclean & sons ltd.acj ca england the court found that while the value of the pound fell by % between and over a period of years there was a steeper fall between to within years when it again fell by % vide kemp & kemp 's tables. conventional figures if they do not keep pace with inflation might indeed become contemptible. kemp & kemp point out that an award of â£ in would be about â£ in. after walker 's case supra courts in england are carefully adjusting awards for pain and suffering and loss of amenities to keep pace with inflation. further the division bench of the high court of kerala in $$$ v. ayyappankadu $$$ and ors. $$$ / ke/0011/1991$$$ / ke/0011/1991 air1991ker47 considered the principle of assessment of compensation for deprivation of amenities of life in a case where an injured boy aged years suffered brain damage because of the accident and has rightly pointed out that in personal injury cases there are categories of general damages consolatory damages compensatory damages and damages for loss of expectation of life and explained it by illustrating thus:--"the amputation of a hand preventing a plaintiff from playing cricket would merit consolatory damages the same loss preventing a man from carrying on his employment would merit compensatory damages. consolatory and compensatory damages represent different elements in an award for general damages for personal injuries and are exhaustive except for the head of damages for loss of expectation of life which is sui generis. $$$ the court observed thus:--..the award is final. there is no procedure prescribed to review the award in future which would enable a substitution of real fact for estimate mankind is denied the privilege of knowledge of the future with certainty. the result is so much of the award as is attributed to the future loss and suffering will almost surely be liable to err. in lim poh choo v. camden and islington area health authority acj ca england considering the insuperable complexities of the problem lord denning mr said that the decision should not be considered as final and it should be considered as an interim award liable to be reviewed. the house of lords in lim poh choo v. camden and islington area health authority acj hl england speaking through lord $$$ said:'it is an attractive ingenious suggestion but in my judgment unsound. for so radical a reform can be made neither by judges nor by modification of rules of court. in this view of the matter in our view it would be difficult to hold that for future medical expenses which are required to be incurred by a victim fresh award could be passed. however for such medical treatment court has to arrive at a reasonable estimate on the basis of the evidence brought on record. in the present case it has been pointed out that for replacing the artificial leg every to years appellant would be required to have some sort of operation and also change the artificial leg. at that time the estimate expenses for this were rs. and the high court has awarded the said amount. for change of artificial leg every or years no compensation is awarded. considering this aspect if rs. lac is awarded as an additional compensation appellant would be in a position to meet the said expenses from the interest of the said amount. equally it is true that the said amount is required to be properly invested on long -term basis so that recurring medical expenses could be met. this principle is established in general manager kerala state road transport corporation trivandrum v. susamma thomas mrs.and ors. $$$ / sc/0389/1994$$$ / sc/0389/1994 air1994sc16 and this court held in para thus:--". in a case of compensation for death it is appropriate that the tribunals do keep in mind the principles enunciated by this court in union carbide corporation v. union of india $$$ / sc/0058/1992$$$ / sc/0058/1992 air1992sc248 in the matter of appropriate investments to safeguard the feed from being frittered away by the beneficiaries owing to ignorance illiteracy and susceptibility to exploitation. in that case approving the judgment of the gujarat high court in muljibhai ajarambhai harijan v. united india insurance co. ltd. $$$ / gj/0141/1982$$$ / gj/0141/1982 this court offered the following guidelines:--(i the claims tribunal should in the case of minors invariably order the amount of compensation awarded to the minor be invested in long term fixed deposits at least till the date of the minor attaining majority. the expenses incurred by the guardian or next friend may however be allowed to be withdrawn:(ii in the case of illiterate claimants also the claims tribunal should follow the procedure set out in above but if lump sum payment is required for effecting purchases of any movable or immovable property such as agricultural implements rickshaw etc.to earn a living the tribunal may consider such a request after making sure that the amount is actually spent for the purpose and the demand is not a ruse to withdraw $$$ in the case of semi -literate persons the tribunal should ordinarily resort to the procedure set out at i above unless it is satisfied for reasons to be stated in writing that the whole or part of the amount is required for expanding and existing business or for purchasing some property as mentid in above for earning his livelihood in which case the tribunal will ensure that the amount is invested for the purpose for which it is demanded and in the case of literate persons also the tribunal may resort to the procedure indicated in above subject to the relaxation set out in ii and above if having regard to the age fiscal background and strata of society to which the claimant belongs and such other considerations the tribunal in the larger interest of the claimant and with a view to ensuring the safety of the compensation awarded to him thinks it necessary to do order;(v in the case of windows the claims tribunal should invariably follow the procedure set out in i above;(vi in personal injury cases if further treatment is necessary the claims tribunal on being satisfied about the same which shall be recorded in writing permit withdrawal of such amount as is necessary for incurring the expenses for such treatment;(vii in all cases in which investment in long term fixed deposits is made it should be on condition that the bank will not permit any loan or advance on the fixed deposit and interest on the amount invested is paid $$$$ directly to the claimant or his guardian as the case may be;(viii in all cases tribunal should grant to the claimants liberty to apply for withdrawal in case of an emergency. to meet with such a contingency if the amount awarded is substantial the claims tribunal may invest it in more than fixed deposit so that if need be such f.d.r. can be liquidated. further in lilaben udesing gobel v. oriental insurance co. ltd. and ors. $$$ / sc/0420/1996$$$ / sc/0420/1996 the court relied upon the said directions and further held that in union carbide corporation 's case supra this court did not include the clause regarding literate persons ' compensation and directed that it should be given the same treatment in case the court found it necessary to do so to protect the compensation awarded to them. the court further added guideline as under:--"we must add further guideline to the effect that when the amount is invested in a fixed deposit the bank should invariably be directed to affix a note on the fixed deposit receipt that no loan or advance should be granted on the strength of the said $$$ without the express permission of the court / tribunal which ordered the deposit. this will eliminate the practice of taking loans which may be up to % of the amount invested and thereby defeating the very purpose of the order. we do hope that the courts / tribunal in the country will not succumb to the temptation of permitting huge withdrawals in the hope of disposing of the claim. we are sure that the courts / tribunals will realise their duty towards the victims of the accident so that a large part of the compensation amount is not lost to them. the very purpose of laying down the guidelines was to ensure the safety of the amount so that the claimants do not become victims of unscrupulous persons and unethical agreements or arrangements. we do hope our anxiety to protect the claimants from exploitation by such elements will be equally shared by the courts tribunals. in the result we allow this appeal partly and award additional compensation of rs. lac to the appellant. the said amount shall be deposited by the insurance company with the trial court and the trial court is directed to invest the said amount on long term fixed deposit in a nearest nationalised bank in the area where the appellant is residing wit the condition that the bank will not permit any loan or advance and the interest on the said amount will be paid $$$$ directly to the claimant till the survives. however on an application by the appellant this condition could be modified by the tribunal in exceptional circumstances if made out by the appellant. finally after the death of appellant the amount be disbursed to his legal heirs on their application. the aforesaid condition is imposed so as to see that appellant does not find it difficult to meet periodical medical expenses as required by him. appeal is allowed accordingly. there shall be no order as to costs.