a.k. sikri j. the prosecution version on the basis of which respondent no. along with various other persons was chargesheeted for the offences punishable under sections and of the indian penal code for short indian penal code goes somewhat like this respondent no. $$$ junghare a- and all other accused persons were the residents of village hatna $$$ $$$ maharashtra. in their village panchayat elections were held sometime in the month of november. political factions led by $$$ a- and other by shriram deceased were in the fray who had fielded their respective candidates. party led by$$$ emerged victorious and was elected whereas candidates set up by shriram were vanquished in the said elections. roughly -months thereafter i..is the date when the incident in question occurred. it so happened that on $$$$ at about p. at village hatna$$$ was sitting under a neem tree on ota. the deceased shriram and few other persons were sitting in front of the house of $$$. at that time respondent no. $$$ along with $$$ $$$ $$$ kishor janardhan $$$ $$$ vitthal mankute sitaram and vasanta came there. they were armed with sticks and sts. seeing them shriram asked accused$$$ as to what had happened. $$$ took a stick from the hand of of the accused and assaulted shriram on the head i. vital part of his body on account of which shriram sustained bleeding injury. $$$ respondent no.  assaulted shriram by his stick on his head due to which shriram fell down and blood started oozing profusely. all other accused persons also assaulted shriram with sticks and sts. $$$ eye -witnesses ulhas durgadas and prakash along with others made an attempt to intervene and rescue shriram. in the process these witnesses also received injuries. the assembly pelted sts at the house of durgadas. after accomplishing their job in this manner all the accused persons fled from the spot. the prosecution further alleged that shriram father of the $$$ herein was referred to the hospital at$$$. from there he was referred to district civil hospital akola. after receiving serious and grievous injuries shriram had g into coma and did not recover therefrom. he succumbed to the injuries on.at a.the police prepared the inquest report of the dead body of shriram on.at a. in the presence of the witnesses and found various injuries on the body of the deceased shriram which were recorded in the inquest report. relevant portion thereof is reproduced below the body of the deceased was lying supine with its head towards sought and feet towards north. left hand of the deceased was resting on the stomach and right hand was straight. fingers of both hands of the deceased were turned inwards partly. there were small black hair on the head of the deceased the nose and ear of the deceased were straight and both the legs were also straight. the eyes and mouth of the deceased were close. on the person of the deceased were old payjama of terrycot cloth having nadi waist tying string and buttons on the front side which bears blood stains from place to place old sando banian of cotton cloth stitched from the tailor having pockets which bears blood stains from place to place old blue coloured under pant of cotton cloth having nadi waist tying string.while cotton bandage of the government hospital was seen tied around the head of the deceased which bears blood stains. in the presence of the pachas when the said bandage was untried an injury came to the notice on the left side of the head through which blood had came out. the said injury was of the size in width approx. on the front side of the head of the deceased was an injury through which blood had came out. it was of the side in length and â½ in width approx. both the said injuries were appearing about â½ deep.thin injury came to the notice extending from the lower portion of the eye upto the left ear of the deceased through which blood had come out. postmortem on the body of shriram was conducted on.by dr. gulab nikam . on that basis the police registered c.r. no. under sections and of indian penal code against the accused persons in number. after completing the investigation challan was filed and these accused persons were chargesheeted for various offences as mentid earlier. after the trial the learned additional sessions judge $$$ vide his judgment and order dated.convicted $$$ and respondent no. $$$ for offences punishable under sections read with section of the indian penal code resulting in the imposition of sentence of imprisonment for life and a fine of rs. each. they were acquitted of the rest of the charges. insofar as other accused persons are concerned they got clean acquittal in all the charges. feeling aggrieved by their conviction $$$ and $$$ respondent no. filed the appeal in the high court. however $$$ died during the pendency of the appeal. thus the appeal survived only at the instance of respondent no. the appeal came up for final arguments and after hearing the counsel for the parties the high court has rendered the impugned judgment dated.wherein it is held that the genesis of the incident has not been established on record by credible and unimpeachable evidence. thus allowing the appeal of respondent no. conviction has been set aside giving the benefit of doubt to him.son of the deceased shriram has felt aggrieved by that judgment and therefore he has challenged the veracity and legality thereof by filing the special leave petition. leave was granted and the matter heard finally at the time of granting leave on the insistence of the counsel for the parties. we may record at this stage that defence of the convicted accused persons was that it was an accidental death as the deceased was under the influence of liquor and had fallen down on the stony ground. the sessions court however did not accept this version as suggested by the defence and recorded the finding that in view of the ocular evidence that was produced on record it can not be said that it was an accidental death. further the death of shriram could not be said to be a suicidal death and certainly not a natural death. it was a homicidal death. at the same time the sessions court also concluded that it could not be said that accused persons were the members of unlawful assembly and their common objective was to cause the death of shriram. it was also not proved that all of them acted in furtherance of the common objective to kill shriram or they committed rioting at the place of incident by means of deadly weapons inasmuch as evidence of pw- to pw- itself speaks of assault on person of shriram by means of sticks and sts only. the court of session also noted that it was not stated by the witnesses as to which accused had executed how many blows. in the opinion of the sessions court since the witnesses had described the role of accused nos. and only other accused persons could not be said to be the author of the injuries on deceased except these accused persons and as such could not be said to be the members of unlawful assembly. it was also recorded that these accused persons had appeared with sticks and sts on the spot and except giving beating to the deceased they did nothing of that sort which may call them rioters. on this basis all the accused persons were acquitted of the charge of rioting. the session judge further recorded looking at the evidence of pw- ulhas durgadas and pw- prakash that all of them had stated that when they intercepted they had also sustained injuries. except this their evidence does not speak about who had beaten them. their evidence being of general nature it is hard to say that the accused or any of them had caused those injuries. dr. $$$ had mentid about the injuries on durgadas and prakash. thus the court had no reason to say that there was any injury caused to ulhas. in respect of allegations of pelting sts by the accused persons on the house of $$$ and thereby acting negligently so as to endanger human life and safety of others it was concluded that there was no evidence except the evidence of pw- prakash who stated that the accused persons pelted sts on the house whereby the safety of the inhabitants was in peril. thus the court was totally in disagreement with the proposition of the prosecution that offence under section indian penal code has been made out. insofar as $$$ and $$$ are concerned the sessions court came to the conclusion that they were the authors of the injuries on the person of the deceased causing his death. it however held that other accused persons can not be said to be the members of an unlawful assembly or they had acted in furtherance of common intention within the province of section indian penal code and rest of the accused can not be said to have the same intention with them or common object and therefore the rest of the accused are entitled to be acquitted on all the counts as the formation of unlawful assembly is not established by the prosecution and their act in prosecution of their common object or creating rioting there by means of deadly weapons and causing injuries to the other persons and pelting of sts has not been established. on these grounds all other accused were acquitted of all the charges. by attributing specific role to $$$ a- and $$$ a- the sessions court convicted them only that too of charge under section indian penal code read with section indian penal code. the court specifically addressed the question as to whether the accused no. and accused no. had committed the offence punishable under section indian penal code. the court stated that causing injuries by both accused no. and accused no. by means of sticks after another on the vital body parts of the deceased i. head showed that there was a common intention of both accused to cause death of shriram. as mentid above the high court examined the culpability of respondent no. only since $$$ had passed away during the pendency of his appeal. the high court noticed that in all witnesses were examined by the prosecution and out of these were the material witnesses viz. pw- ulhas durgadas and pw- prakash. they were examined as eye -witnesses. deceased shriram was their $$$ and these witnesses were related to the deceased. the high court also took note of the fact that they were factions in the village and the incident had happened shortly after the $$$ elections. the accused persons belonged to the rival factions. in these circumstances as per the high court though the evidence of these witnesses could not be discarded only on the ground of the witnesses being either partisan or related at the same time the court had to be circumspect in appreciating such evidence and greater care and caution was needed while finding out whether their evidence inspired confidence. in an appropriate case the court would also make an attempt to look for corroboration either direct or circumstantial in order to lend credence to the evidence of such witnesses. with the aforesaid introductory remarks the high court had minute and meticulous examination of the deposition of these witnesses. in the process it found certain material discrepancies in their statements. the court also noticed substantial improvements made by these witnesses in their depositions as compared to the statements which they had given to the police during investigation under section of the code of criminal procedure. such aspects were duly brought out by the defence in cross examination of these witnesses. following discussion in the impugned judgment thereafter needs a reproduction it would appear that there are substantial improvements made by p.w. in his evidence over his police statement. in this case the prosecution has not examined the investigating officer as a result the $$$s / accused were deprived of an opportunity to bring on record these improvements. insofar as the present $$$ - is concerned there is a general statement that he also inflicted a stick blow on the person of shriram. nowhere these witnesses have stated about having inflicted a stick blow on the head of the deceased. thus the observation to that effect in paragraph no. of the impugned judgment in our considered view is not borne out of the evidence on record. it would be significant to note that the learned sessions judge has not accepted the evidence of these witnesses about the complicity of the rest of the accused whose names figured in their evidence. the learned sessions judge has also not accepted the prosecution case about all these accused persons having formed an unlawful assembly with the common object of committing the murder of shriram. in order to convict the $$$s the learned sessions judge has taken the aid of the provisions of section of indian penal code and had found that common intention can be gathered between $$$ and in causing the death of shriram. we find that once the version of these material prosecution witnesses about the complicity of the other accused has not been accepted the present $$$ could not have been convicted for the offence punishable under section of indian penal code with the aid of section of indian penal code particularly when there is no evidence on record to show that he had assaulted the deceased on his head. in addition the high court has also pointed out some more aspects which dent the veracity of prosecution case. these are:(a as per the statement of dr. $$$ medical officer at p.h.c. $$$ who had opportunity to examine the deceased injuries were found on the person of the deceased and both were simple having been caused by hard and blunt object. had issued injury certificate ex. and reading thereof along with statement of showed that deceased shriram had consumed alcohol and was under the influence of the said alcohol.dr. gulab nikam who had conducted the autopsy on the dead body of shriram had noticed injuries which were recorded by him in his report which according to him were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. the high court noted that injury no. was incised wound on left side of the face starting from below lateral ankle of right eye just above toagus of left ear size inch x â½ inch x â½ inch. however contrary to the above insofar as is concerned he had noticed only injuries on the person of the deceased on.which would certainly militate against the story of assault by sticks and sts by as many as persons.thus medical evidence was at variance with the ocular testimonies and the evidence so led could not be accepted. here the medical evidence had the effect of destroying the ocular testimony itself and therefore the prosecution case had to fail inasmuch as findings of simple injuries immediately after the incident in the wake of allegedly assault by as many as persons would certainly create a serious dent and doubt in the prosecution version and the evidence of the so -called witnesses.according to the high court the genesis of the incident and mode and the manner of the assault and the role played by the individual accused did not clearly come on record.once the evidence of material prosecution witnesses to had not been accepted qua the formation of unlawful assembly by the accused persons the conviction of under section indian penal code could not be sustained with the aid of section of indian penal code particularly so when there was no evidence to show that respondent no. had inflicted blow on the head of the deceased as observed by the sessions court.in nutshell aforesaid are the reasons given by the high court while acquitting respondent no.. $$$ for the $$$ submitted that a serious error was committed by the high court in holding that there was no evidence to show that respondent no. had inflicted blow on the head of the deceased. he drew our attention to the testimony of eye witnesses who according to him had specifically narrated the role of respondent no. in inflicting injuries on the person of the deceased. he further submitted that this aspect was specifically taken note of by the trial court while convicting respondent no. on this basis he argued that the observations of the high court that there was no evidence to implicate respondent no. was contrary to the record. $$$ for respondent no. on the other hand stood by the reasoning that has been given by the high court in support of its conclusion and submitted that high court had not committed any error in arriving at the aforesaid findings. he argued that all the eye -witnesses have stated in their depositions that respondent no. gave a blow to the deceased. in the instance it was their improved version as they did not say anything before the police about the role of respondent no. further witness out of the did not even mention as to in what manner the blow was given and also did not state the weapon allegedly used by him. other witnesses had stated that respondent no. had given a stick blow on the person of the deceased. thus there was no allegation against respondent no. that he gave a blow on the head of the deceased. on the contrary all these witnesses had specifically mentid that $$$ was author of head injury and postmortem report had clearly spelled out that death was caused due to head injury. he further submitted that apart from the above high court had also pointed out various other infirmities in the prosecution story which are of serious nature. we shall first deal with the arguments of the learned counsel for the $$$ relating to the alleged involvement of respondent no. in the commission of the act for which the accused persons were prosecuted. as noted the argument was that respondent no. had also inflicted head injury to the deceased and the high court has failed to notice the same. it is true that pws-1 and have stated in their depositions that respondent no. gave a blow to the deceased. however at the same time it has also come on record that of the witnesses has not mentid as to in what manner the blow was given or which weapon was used. other witnesses have stated that a stick blow was given on the person of the deceased. relevant portion of the depositions of these witnesses in this behalf is reproduced below pw-1-there $$$ took a stick from person and inflicted a blow on the head of my uncle. the accused $$$ beat my uncle.pw--according $$$ took a stick from hand of other person and inflicted a blow on the head of my uncle shriram. then accused $$$ inflicted a stick blow on the person of my uncle.pw-3-the accused khandusing inflicted a stick blow on the head of shriram. then accused $$$ inflicted a stick blow on the person of shriram. it is clear from the above that insofar as khandusing is concerned it is specifically stated that he gave a blow on the head of the deceased. but qua respondent no. the only allegation is that the blow was given on the person of the deceased. it is not stated that respondent no. had given a blow on the head of the deceased. even if the postmortem report is to be believed the death was caused due to head injury. thus attribution qua respondent no. is that he has only given a stick blow on the body of the deceased without specifying which part thereof. it is also to be borne in mind that when the statement of these witnesses were recorded by the investigating officer under section of code of criminal procedure they did not say anything about respondent no. and whatever is stated in the court as extracted above is an improved version. since this was the main argument of the appellant and when we find no merit therein the appeal is liable to fail. however in addition we would also like to observe that the high court did not only go by the alleged role that was attributed to respondent no. but took into consideration the case of prosecution in its entirety and found various loopholes in the prosecution story which had already been discussed above. suffice it is to point out that as per the prosecution case there were as many as persons including respondent no. who formed unlawful assembly and came to the place of incident with common intention to kill shriram. even as per the trial court charges pertaining to unlawful assembly or the complicity of other accused persons had not been proved and the trial court itself acquitted all the accused persons except khandusing and respondent no. in a case like this respondent no. can not be convicted with the aid of section indian penal code more particularly in the absence of any allegation against him of any fatal assault. in pandurang and ors. v. the state of hyderabad manu / $$$ / sc/0048/1954 scr this court held that to attract the applicability of section of the code the prosecution is under an obligation to establish that there existed a common intention which requires a pre -arranged plan because before a man can be vicariously convicted for the criminal act of another the act must have been d in furtherance of the common intention of all. this court had in mind the ultimate act d in furtherance of the common intention. in the absence of a pre -arranged plan and thus a common intention even if several persons simultaneously attack a man and each of them by having his individual intention namely the intention to kill and each can individually inflict a separate fatal blow and yet n would have the common intention required by the section. in a case like that each would be individually liable for whatever injury he caused but none could be vicariously convicted for the act of any or the other. the high court has also correctly relied on the law laid down by this court in the case of noor @ nooruddin v. state of karnataka manu / sc/7645/$$$$manu / sc/7645/$$$$ scc wherein this court has held that when there was nothing on record to show that the accused had inflicted injury on the vital part of the body section of the indian penal code would not be attracted. in a case like this it is the specific role of respondent no. which has to be established to find out what particular crime is committed by him. though evidence of pw-1 to pw-3 does not inspire confidence insofar as respondent no. is concerned even if it is to be accepted on its face value the role attributed to him of giving blow on the body of the deceased with stick by no stretch of imagination it can be said that it was done with the intention to cause his death. it is also to be borne in mind that pw-6 had found only injuries on the body of the deceased which were not of serious nature. that apart prosecution can not also shy away from the fact that deceased was found to be under the influence of alcohol and since injury on the head was found to have been caused by a blunt object it was possible that such a injury was caused as a result of fall on the floor. when we examine the matter in all its length and breadth and in a holistic manner we are inclined to form an irresistible opinion that conviction of respondent no. was rightly set aside by the high court. this appeal accordingly fails and is hereby dismissed.no costs.