. the challenge in this appeal is against the order dated 1st december passed by the allahabad high court by which the writ petition filed by the appellants contesting the notifications issued under sections read with section and of the land acquisition act for short the act as well as the declaration issued under section of the act has been dismissed. we have heard the learned counsels for the contesting parties and perused the relevant material. the date of publication of the notification under section of the act by manadi was.the declaration under section was dated.while the notice under section 9(1 of the act was dated.. the compensation on an estimated basis was deposited on.. the award was made on 12th june and possession of the land was taken over in the month of july. construction of the electricity substation for which purpose the land was acquired commenced in the year. it is on the said facts that the writ petition was structured contending that there was no urgency to invoke section and dispense with the inquiry under section a of the act. the high court appears to have perused the entire file in original to arrive at the conclusion that the delay in taking over the possession has been adequately explained. furthermore the high court also took the view that the present would not be a fit case for interference inasmuch as co -owners have already accepted the compensation under the award and the construction of the electricity sub -station was in full progress. the high court in considering the question of delay also took into account the fact that the land in question was covered by crops. hence the order of dismissal of the writ petition. on the basis of the dates mentioned by us in the preceding paragraph even if we are to hold that the high court was not justified in coming to its impugned conclusion and the dispensation of inquiry under section a of the act in the present case can not be justified the further question that we have to answer is whether in the exercise of the appellate jurisdiction of this court under article we ought to interfere with the impugned notifications at a stage when admittedly the electricity sub -station has been completed and is functional. in a somewhat similar situation this court in anand singh and anr. v. state of uttar pradesh and ors.manu / sc/052/$$$$manu / sc/052/$$$$ scc has taken up the view that though dispensation of enquiry under section 5a was not justified interference would not called for. paragraph of the report in anand singh 's case supra wherein the aforesaid view was taken may be conveniently extracted below.in the written submissions of the gda it is stated that subsequent to the declaration made under section of the act in the month of december award has been made and out of the landowners more than have already received compensation. it is also stated that out of the total cost of for development of the acquired land an amount of has already been spent by the gda and more than % of the work has been completed. it thus seems that barring the appellants and few others all other tenure -holders / landowners have accepted the takings of their land. it is too late in $$$$ to undo what has already been done. we are of the opinion therefore that in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case the appellants are not entitled to any relief although dispensation of enquiry under section 5a was not justified. in light of the view taken by this court in anand singh 's case supra and as the facts of the present case are largely similar we are of the view that we ought not to interfere with the order of the high court under challenge. the appeal therefore is dismissed and the order of the high court is affirmed. before parting we would like to observe that by an interim order dated 17th february this court had observed that as the construction of electricity sub -station has been completed the compensation payable should be on the basis of market value as on the date of taking over of possession and not on the date of the section notification. pursuant to the aforesaid order of the court an affidavit by the learned additional district magistrate land acquisition $$$ u.p.has been filed on 17th april before this court wherein it has been indicated that instead of the rate of rupees lakhs only per hectare the appellants would be entitled to compensation at the rate of 49,84,165/- rupees lakhs only per hectare. notwithstanding the dismissal of the appeal we leave it open for the appellants to receive the aforesaid compensation at the rate of 49,84,165/- rupees lakhs only per hectare if they so desire.