b.p. singh j. special leave granted. this appeal is directed against the judgment and order of the high court of judicature at bombay dated.in appeal no. of whereby the division bench of the high court affirmed the judgment of the learned single judge allowing the arbitration petition filed by the respondent under section of the arbitration and conciliation act challenging the award of the umpire dated th march on the ground of an error of law apparent on the face of the award. the appellant -companies are licensees under the indian electricity act hereinafter referred to as the act. a power supply agreement was executed on between the aforesaid companies and president of india represented by central $$$s and western $$$s. under the agreement electric power is supplied to the railways at a number of points on the railways electrified track route for the operation of the railways electric trains services. clause of the said agreement contains an arbitration clause which reads as under:-".in the event of any dispute or difference at any time arising between the government and the companies in regard to any matter arising out of or in connection with this agreement such dispute or difference shall be referred to arbitration of arbitrators to be appointed by each party thereto and an umpire to be appointed by the arbitrators before entering upon the reference and decision or award of the said arbitrators or umpire shall be final and binding on the parities hereto and any reference made under this clause shall be deemed to be a submission to arbitration under the arbitration act or any statutory modification thereof for the time being in force. the venue of arbitration shall be bombay. the facts of the case are that on the appellants found that western $$$s feeder no. red phase current was lower o amps.than blue phase current amps. the respondent was accordingly advised by message dated thjune indicating that the appellants would be carrying out further investigation. on $$$$ further investigation was carried out in the presence of representative of western $$$s and it was confirmed that in feeder no. the main $$$ ct in red phase had developed inter turn short resulting in lower output from its secondary windings. the appellants therefore replaced the defective ct and installed a new ct after showing the test results on the defective ct to the representative of the western $$$s. the meter was checked and found satisfactory. $$$sequent to the replacement of the defective ct on $$$$ the off take of the trivector meter and the sum of the energy recorded on the energy meters at dharavi were found to be higher by.per cent. on.the appellants informed the western $$$s about the defect that had been detected and rectified and also that they shall advise the $$$s the exact period of under registration and the estimation of the quantum of energy that had not been registered by the tariff meter due to the defective ct. by their subsequent letter of they informed the respondent that the western $$$s ' off take recorded at dharavi $$$$ and june was lower by about per cent compared to the off take $$$$ $$$$ and that the recorded off take of western $$$s after replacement of the defective ct on $$$$ had come back to the level prevailing before $$$$. the appellants therefore expressed the need to make an adjustment of about.per cent of the total $$$$ energy off take of $$$s at dharavi billed since $$$$ up to. on the appellants submitted a supplementary bill to the respondent dated for rs.for the period of under registration i. from th $$$$ to giving inter -alia the extent of adjustment in energy off take the m.d. fuel adjustment charges etc. a request was made for early payment of the bill. the respondent vide its letter of drew the attention of the appellants to para.and.of the contract agreement between the parties and stated that the metering responsibility as a whole lay with the appellants and that there is no interference by the $$$s in this regard. moreover par.of the contract agreement provided $$$$ months as a corrective period during which the defective meter should have been put back to the required accuracy level. considering the date of the bill as.the respondent expressed its readiness to consider the period of under registration for a maximum period of preceding months i. w.f. may. if so advised the appellants were required to submit a revised bill. it appears that several meeting took place between the parties but they could not come to an agreement. on nd june the appellants wrote to the respondent referring to its supplementary bill and the discussions which the parties had on the subject. however since the issue remained unresolved the appellants informed the respondent that they were resorting to clause of the power supply agreement and refer the matter to arbitrators each to be appointed by the parties. this was followed by letter dated thjuly informing the respondent that the appellants had appointed mr. a.d. limaye retd.asstt. general manager supply best as their arbitrator in terms of clause of the agreement. the respondent was requested to name its arbitrator and advise the appellants. accordingly by letter dated nd february the respondent appointed shri r.k. sinha financial advisor and chief accounts officer western $$$s as its arbitrator and endorsed a copy of this letter to the appellants for information. the arbitrators entered upon the arbitration but since they failed to agree they referred the dispute to the umpire by their letter dated. thereafter the umpire received the documents from both the arbitrators in january. the claims was filed by the appellants before the umpire and a reply filed thereto by the respondent in the months of march and april. the umpire entered upon the reference on april and ultimately passed an award on awarding a lump sum of rs. crores to the appellants with interest @ per cent per annum from ust till the passing of the decree. the respondent filed an arbitration petition of under section of the arbitration and conciliation act challenging the award on the ground of error of law apparent on the face of the award contending that the decision of the arbitrator was clearly contrary to the law laid down by the supreme court by its judgment and order dated. a learned single judge of the high court set aside the award on the ground that it was contrary to the law as declared by the supreme court in upseb v. $$$ and ors. manu / sc//manu / sc//. he also held that the umpire had no jurisdiction in the matter since the dispute could be resolved only under section of the indian electricity act which precluded private arbitration. the dispute therefore could be resolved only by the electrical inspector as provided in section of the act. the appellants preferred an appeal against the judgment and order of the learned single judge setting aside the award but the said appeal was dismissed by the division bench of the high court in appeal no. of by judgment and order dated $$$$ affirming the judgment and order of the learned single judge. the judgment and order of the division bench is the subject matter of challenge in this appeal. section of the indian electricity act provides inter -alia that in the absence of an agreement to the contrary the amount of energy supplied to a consumer or the electrical quantity contained in the supply shall be ascertained by means of a correct meter and the licensee shall if required by the consumer cause the consumer to be supplied with such a meter. $$$ -sections & of section of the act are relevant and read thus:-"( where any difference or dispute arises as to whether any meter referred to in $$$ -section is or is not correct the matter shall be decided upon the application of either party by an electrical inspector and where the meter has in the opinion of such inspector ceased to be correct such. inspector shall estimate the amount of the energy supplied to the consumer or the electrical quantity contained in the supply during such time not exceeding months as the meter shall not in the opinion of such inspector have been correct but save as aforesaid the register of the meter shall in the absence of fraud be conclusive proof of such amount or quantity provided that before either a licensee or a consumer applies to the electrical inspector under this sub -section he shall give to the other party not less than days ' notice of his intention so to do.in addition to any meter which may be placed upon the premises of a consumer in pursuance of the provisions of $$$ -section the licensee may place upon such premises such meter maximum demand indicator or other apparatus as he may think fir for the purpose of ascertaining or regulating either the amount of energy supplied to the consumer or during which the supply is given or the rate per unit of time at which energy is supplied to the consumer or any other quantity or time connected with the supply provided that the meter indicator or apparatus shall not in the absence of an agreement to the contrary be placed otherwise than between the distributing mains of the licensee and any meter referred to in $$$ -section );provided also that where the charges for the supply of energy depend wholly or partly upon the reading or indication of any such meter indicator or apparatus as aforesaid the licensee shall in the absence of an agreement to the contrary keep the meter indicator or apparatus correct and the provisions of $$$ -sections and shall in that case apply as though the meter indicator or apparatus were a meter referred to in $$$ -section.explanation. meter shall be deemed to be correct if it registers the amount of energy supplied or the electrical quantity contained in the supply within the prescribed limits of error and a maximum demand indicator or other apparatus referred to in $$$ -section shall be deemed to be correct if it complies with such conditions as may be prescribed in the case of any such indicator or other apparatus. issues were highlighted before the high court by the parties. while it was contended on behalf of the appellants that a current transformer c.t.is not a meter within the meaning of section of the act the respondent contended that a current $$$ being an apparatus for the purpose of ascertaining or regulating the amount of energy supplied to the consumer it was an apparatus contemplated by section of the act and for this reliance was placed on the decision of the supreme court in $$$ supra. secondly the respondents contended that the dispute since it related to a defective meter and consequent under registering of electricity supplied was a dispute within the contemplation of section of the act and therefore such a dispute could be resolved only by the electrical inspector as provided in $$$ -section of section. a statutory arbitration provided in the aforesaid sub -section ruled out any private arbitration and therefore the umpire had no jurisdiction to pass an award in respect of such a dispute even if referred to it by the parties. the appellants sought to sustain the award contending that since the parties had submitted a specific question to the arbitrator for his decision viz whether a ct was an apparatus within the meaning of the proviso to section of the act which could confer exclusive jurisdiction on the electrical inspector to decide the dispute even if the specific question was decided errously by the arbitrator the award could not be set aside on that ground. on these questions the learned single judge as well as appellate bench have held in favour of the respondents. a perusal of the award of the umpire would disclose that he has noticed in detail the submissions urged before him by the parties. the umpire had also before him the statements of $$$$ energy consumption as recorded by the appellants billed figures and the western $$$s aggregate figures of the energy recorded by western $$$s own meters at $$$ 's end of the western $$$ feeders. these were furnished by the western $$$s in annexure of their letter dated.. the chart which is incorporated in the award itself is as follows is observed from col.of the table that the ratio of energy consumption as recorded by w. $$$ 's meter to that recorded by $$$ 's meters at the receiving end which was around.to.dropped to.in june and from july to may remained in the range of.to. the ratio changed to.to june ' and picked upto.in $$$$. notwithstanding w. rly 's foot note that $$$ 's meters are not periodically calibrated and therefore could not be relied upon though there was a contradiction on this front in the remarks of mr. p.p. $$$. sec. $$$ s / s of w. rly 's observation that the kwhr. elements of tvms were being calibrated once in years and mr. jain of w. rly later clarifying in w. rly 's letter of.that this practice was not being rigidly adhered to and the further fact that aggregation of readings also results in aggregation of errors of individuals meters some positive and some negative is worth noting that this comparison corroborates the fact of the meter registration at dharavi rs dropped down from october onwards till in june when the defective ct was replaced. it is no doubt true that before the umpire it was seriously urged on behalf of the $$$s that ct was an apparatus within the meaning of the proviso to section of the indian electricity act while on the other hand it was contended on behalf of the appellant that ct is not such an apparatus and therefore any defect in the ct will not amount to a defect in the meter. the umpire in his award upheld the contention of the appellant. it was urged before the high court as also before us that having regard to the judgment of this court in u.p.s.e.b. v. atma steel supra it is no longer open to the appellant to contend that ct was not an apparatus within the meaning of section of the act. having perused the judgment of this court in atma steel 's case supra we also entertain no doubt that ct is an apparatus within the meaning of section of the act. the question that still survives consideration is whether the dispute before the umpire was in fact a dispute contemplated by section of the act. $$$ -section of section begins with the words where any difference or dispute arises as to whether any meter referred to in $$$ -section is or is not correct the matter shall be decided upon the application of either party by an electrical inspector... $$$ -section contemplates a difference or dispute where party contends that the meter has rightly recorded the energy supplied while the other controverts that position and contends that it has not correctly recorded the supply of electrical energy. if such a dispute arises between the parties the matter is required to be decided by an electrical inspector and it is he who can pronounce upon the question as to whether the meter was or was not correct. based upon his finding he is authorized to estimate the amount of the energy supplied during such time not exceeding months as the meter shall not in his opinion have been correct. a dispute as to whether ct is an apparatus within the meaning of $$$ -section of section is not such a dispute unless it is further contended that the ct which is an apparatus within the meaning of $$$ -section of section was in fact defective and therefore the meter had incorrectly recorded the supply of electrical energy. in short before an electrical inspector can be called upon to decide a dispute under $$$ -section of section it must be shown that while party contends that the meter including the ct is defective the other contends to the contrary. in the facts of this case we find that there was in fact no dispute that the ct was defective and it had therefore to be replaced. in fact when the supplementary bill was submitted by the appellant the western $$$s did not dispute the position that the ct was defective but only denied their liability to pay the amount of rs.crores demanded in the supplementary bill and contended that at best they were liable to pay only rs. since demand for under registration by the meter could be permitted for a maximum period of months of the demand as per the power supply agreement. considering the date of the bill as the respondent expressed its readiness to consider the period of under registration for a maximum period of preceding months i. with effect from may and wrote to the appellant that if so advised it may submit a revised bill. it therefore appears that there was really no dispute between the parties that the meter was defective. even if we proceed on the basis that ct is a meter / apparatus within the meaning of $$$ -section of section of the act the only dispute was whether the respondent was liable to pay the entire supplementary bill as claimed by the appellant or whether their liability was limited to a period of months preceding the date of the bill. where there is no dispute that the meter is defective such a dispute is not contemplated by $$$ -section of section of the act. it is no doubt true that if a dispute as contemplated by $$$ -section of section of the act arises the matter has to be referred to the electrical inspector and in view of the statutory provisions private arbitration in the case of such a dispute is not permissible in law. however if there is no dispute as to whether the meter is defective or not there is nothing which prevents the parties from referring their other disputes to arbitration for determining the liability of the consumer in such cases. it is only where any difference or dispute arises as to whether any meter referred to in $$$ -section of section is or is not correct that dispute has mandatorily to be resolved by the electrical inspector. in resolving the dispute the electrical inspector can make an estimate of the electrical energy supplied during such time not exceeding months as the meter shall not in his opinion have been correct. for the remaining period the register of the meter is deemed to be conclusive proof of such amount or quantity in the absence of fraud. all this pre -supposes the existence of a dispute contemplated by section of the act which has to be resolved by the electrical inspector. the umpire no doubt held that ct was not an apparatus within the meaning of $$$ -section of section of the act. since an argument was raised before him that ct is such an apparatus within the meaning of $$$ -section of section he expressed his opinion in the matter and may be he decided wrongly. but that by itself will not bring the dispute under $$$ -section of section of the act. it was neither contended before the umpire nor was it decided by the umpire that the ct was not defective. this was so because the parties were agreed that the ct was defective. in any event that is not the basis of the award. all that the umpire had to decide was whether there was under registration of supply of electrical energy to the respondent and if so the extent thereof and the liability of the respondent to pay for such electrical energy supplied but not recorded. from a perusal of the award it appears that that is precisely what the umpire has d. having noticed all the facts and circumstances of the case the umpire recorded his finding in the following words:-"in the event taking into account the facts1 that it is nobody 's case that the $$$ has not been paying regularly according to the bills preferred by tec based on the energy consumption and md recorded by their meter the maintenance of whose accuracy is entirely the responsibility of tec in terms of the power supply agreement as well as the i.e. act and which meter incidentally had been tested to be working properly in the tests carried out by tec in nov.and march in the presence of $$$ 's representative.that the traffic level handled by the w. rly. during the dispute period had not decreased or remained static but had on the contrary increased while the aggregate energy consumed had dropped despite the railway not having undertaken any improved methods of operation or implementation of any energy saving techniques and further that after the disputed period the level of energy consumed had attained higher levels in the consonance with the traffic levels obtaining in these later periods establishes the fact that during the disputed period there has been some part of the energy consumed that has escaped metering.that the time taken by tec to discover the defect that had arisen in their metering ct was an abnormally long and that the consumer can not be penalized for tec 's failure to discover this defect for whatever reasons they be in a reasonable time particularly when they had the obligation to maintain the meter and metering system in a state of good repair as well as accuracy level and that the customer can not be penalized for the failure of the ct attributable to probable manufacturing defect if any and with a view to answering that the ends of natural justice equity and fairplay are properly met with with respect to both the parties i pronounce my lumpsum award of rs. crores only rupees crores only in favour of the claimant payable by the railway i hold that the payment becomes due w.f. . i also award interest charges of % p.a. w.f. . till the passing of the court decree. as noticed earlier the umpire took into account the readings of the meters maintained by the railways themselves but did not give to the appellant the full benefit thereof otherwise the amount would have been much higher. only a lumpsum award of rs. crores was made. in fact during the pendency of the special leave petition before this court as well the court had noticed the fact that the western railways was also maintaining meters at their end and the said meters revealed the total energy consumed at the railways end at feeder stations. this was noticed by the umpire as well. there appeared to be no reason why the railways should not pay the amount as per their own meters. it appeared unfair and inequitable that the union government should deny to pay the amount for the electricity consumed as per their own record. counsel for the union of india was given time to consider the matter and obtain necessary instructions. it however appears that the union of india was not included to settle the dispute and therefore the matter had to be heard. we therefore hold that the high court erred in setting aside the award of the umpire on a finding that the dispute before him was contemplated by sub -section of section of the act and therefore not arbitrable. we hold that the parties never disputed the fact that the ct which is an apparatus within the meaning of sub -section of section of the act was in fact defective. there being therefore no dispute as to whether the meter had ceased to be correct the dispute was not contemplated by sub -section of the section of the act. in fact n of the parties even raised a contention before the umpire that the ct was not defective and therefore the umpire was not required to give his finding on the question which in a dispute under section of the act is the primary question to be decided. the dispute related only to the claim of the appellant who had submitted a supplementary bill for the electrical energy supplied but not recorded. in the absence of a dispute as to whether the meter was or was not correct such a dispute was arbitrable. the umpire on the basis of the material before him particularly total energy consumed by the railways as per summation of kwhr readings at railways end of feeders for which there is no dispute made an award which in our view he was entitled to make. however on aspect of the matter we feel that the award requires to be modified. the umpire has awarded interest @ % per annum with effect from august till the passing of the court decree. in the facts and circumstances of the case the award is required to be modified to the extent that interest be awarded at the same rate but with effect from the date of the award i. instead of august. the impugned judgment and order of the high court is set aside. the appeal is accordingly allowed with the said modification. let a decree be drawn up accordingly. there shall be no order as to costs.