. heard mr. sarim naved learned counsel for the $$$. in this petition preferred under article of the constitution of india the $$$ has prayed for declaring section of the india penal code as ultra vires $$$ and of the constitution of india. be it noted a constitution bench of this court in ramji lal modi v. state of u.p. manu / sc/0101/157manu / sc/0101/157 air sc has upheld the constitutional validity of section of the indian penal code by holding thus:8. it is pointed out that section 5a has been included in chapter xv of the indian penal code which deals with offences relating to religion and not in chapter viii which deals with offences against the public tranquility and from this circumstance it is faintly sought to be urged therefore that offences relating to religion have no bearing on the maintenance of public order or tranquility and consequently a law creating an offence relating to religion and imposing restrictions on the right to freedom of speech and expression can not claim the protection of clause of article reference to $$$ and of the constitution which guarantee the right to freedom of religion will show that the argument is utterly untenable. the right to freedom of religion assured by those $$$ is expressly made subject to public order morality and health. therefore it can not be predicated that freedom of religion can have no bearing whatever on the maintenance of public order or that a law creating an offence relating to religion can not under any circumstances be said to have been enacted in the interests of public order. these articles in terms contemplate that restrictions may be imposed on the rights guaranteed by them in the interests of public order. $$$ then shifted his ground and formulated his objection in a slightly different way. insults to the religion or the religious beliefs of a class of citizens of india may says learned counsel lead to public disorders in some cases but in many cases they may not do so and therefore a law which imposes restrictions on the citizens ' freedom of speech and expression by simply making insult to religion an offence will cover both varieties of insults i.those which may lead to public disorders as well as those which may not. the law in so far as it covers the variety may be said to have been enacted in the interests of public order within the meaning of clause of article but in so far as it covers the remaining variety will not fall within that clause. the argument then concludes that so long as the possibility of the law being applied for purposes not sanctioned by the constitution can not be ruled out the entire law should be held to be unconstitutional and void. we are unable in view of the language used in the impugned section to accede to this argument. in the place clause of article protects a law imposing reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right to freedom of speech and expression in the interests of public order which is much wider than for maintenance of public order. if therefore certain activities have a tendency to cause public disorder a law penalising such activities as an offence can not but be held to be a law imposing reasonable restriction in the interests of public order although in some cases those activities may not actually lead to a breach of public order. in the next place section 95a does not penalise any and every act of insult to or attempt to insult the religion or the religious beliefs of a class of citizens but it penalises only those acts of insults to or those varieties of attempts to insult the religion or the religious beliefs of a class of citizens which are perpetrated with the deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings of that class. insults to religion offered unwittingly or carelessly or without any deliberate or malicious intention to outrage the religious feelings of that class do not come within the section. it only punishes the aggravated form of insult to religion when it is perpetrated with the deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings of that class. the calculated tendency of this aggravated form of insult is clearly to disrupt the public order and the section which penalises such activities is well within the protection of clause of article as being a law imposing reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right to freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by article. having regard to the ingredients of the offence created by the impugned section there can not in our opinion be any possibility of this law being applied for purposes not sanctioned by the constitution. in other words the language employed in the section is not wide enough to cover restrictions both within and without the limits of constitutionally permissible legislative action affecting the fundamental right guaranteed by article and consequently the question of severability does not arise and the decisions relied upon by learned counsel for the $$$ have no application to this case. in our considered opinion the controversy having been put to rest the matter does not deserve to be reopened for the purpose of referring to a larger bench. in view of the aforesaid we are not inclined to entertain this prayer. needless to say if the $$$ intends to challenge lodging of fir on the grounds permissible as per law he is at liberty to approach the high court. with the aforesaid observation the writ petition stands dismissed.