b.p. singh j. this appeal by special leave has been preferred by the food corporation of india and is directed against the judgment and order of the high court of $$$ and $$$ dated april in l.p.a. no. of. by the impugned judgment and order the high court affirmed the order passed by a learned single judge of the high court dated february in execution application no. of filed for execution of the order passed in c.w.p. no. of holding that in terms of the judgment and order dated in c.w.p. no. of the respondent herein was not only entitled to notional seniority and promotions but also to the arrears of pay and allowances with effect from the dates of such promotion. the facts of the case may be briefly noticed respondent herein petitioner in the writ petition joined as an $$$ d in the food corporation of india the appellant herein on. shri h.k. $$$ respondent no. in the writ petition was similarly appointed as $$$ d on 1st july. both were simultaneously promoted as $$$ on the basis of inclusion of his name in the panel of the respondent was not similarly promoted on account of the fact that his name had not been included in the panel of. this according to the respondent had been done intentionally wit a view to harm him. only much later the respondent was also promoted to $$$ i(d on the basis of panel. though mr. $$$ was further promoted as assistant manager d on the basis of panel respondent continued as an $$$ i. the case of the respondent in the writ petition was that he being senior to mr. $$$ respondent no. in the writ petition his case could not be over looked when mr. bhardwaj was promoted as $$$ i(d and later promoted as assistant manager d. his case was that on account of the deliberate omission of his name from panel he was deprived of his chances of promotion and the authorities had acted arbitrarily and in an illegal manner. the petitioner made representations. the authorities realizing their mistake took corrective action. by an order dated respondent was granted notional seniority and promotion. he was retrospectively promoted as $$$ d and $$$ i(d from earlier dates but he was neither given the arrears of salary nor his further promotion as assistant manager d. he was therefore compelled to file a writ petition being civil $$$ no. of. in the said writ petition respondent no. apart from praying that he should be considered for promotion to the post of assistant manager d also prayed for modification of the order dated which deprived him of arrears of pay and allowances and other consequential benefits. his prayer was that he should be given not only notional promotions and seniority but also the arrears of pay and allowances with effect from the dates on which he was promoted to assistant ii(d and $$$ i(d on the basis of and panels respectively. he also claimed arrears of pay with effect from the date he was promoted as assistant manager d. the writ petition came up for hearing before a learned judge or the high court of $$$ & haryana and it appears from the perusal of the said judgment and order that the respondents in the writ petition did not controvert the averments made in the writ petition as no reply was filed by the respondents. it also appears that neither the counsel for the petitioner nor the counsel for the respondents appeared when the matter was taken up for hearing. the learned judge however perused the record before him and after noticing the relevant facts inter alia observed as follows:"a perusal of the writ petition alongwith the documents filed with it clearly shows that even though entitlement of the petitioner to retrospective pay fixation had not been disputed by the respondents actual benefits have not been given to him. this to the petitioner despite the fact that as early as.the assistant manager of the corporation had informed the petitioner 's counsel that the matter is under consideration. failure of the respondents to take a decision in the matter has already caused a serious prejudice to the petitioner and therefore it is eminently a fit case in which a direction deserves to be given to the respondents to give the benefits of pay fixation to the petitioner and also consider his case for promotion with effect from the date persons junior to him have been promoted. he consequently allowed the writ petition in the following terms:-"consequently the writ petition is allowed and a writ of mandamus is issued to the respondents to give the benefits of pay fixation to the petitioner as $$$ and $$$ i and also to consider his case for promotion to the post of assistant manager d from a date persons junior to him have been promoted. this exercise must be completed within $$$$ months from the date of submission of a certified copy of this order. the arrears of pay shall be paid to the petitioner within month thereafter. in case the amount of arrears is not paid within this period the petitioner shall get interest @ % from the date of this order. no costs. it is not disputed before us that subsequently respondent herein was promoted as assistant manager d with effect from the year but it was also decided that he should be paid his pay and allowances as assistant manager d only with effect from 2nd january the date of joining. respondent herein was aggrieved on account of the fact that no formal order was issued granting him promotion and notional seniority nor was any action taken to promote him as assistant manager d. it appears that the respondent had filed a contempt petition which he withdrew on th december but he filed the contempt petition which was disposed of by the court by its order dated. the contempt application was disposed of relegating the respondent to his remedy of challenging the impugned action of the respondents by filing a civil $$$. the court noticed that while the petitioner respondent herein contended that the order of the court passed in $$$ on had been implemented in part according to the respondents authorities the order had been fully implemented. the respondent herein thereafter filed a $$$ before the high court of judicature at allahabad which was not entertained by that court in view of the fact that the $$$ in effect was for the execution of an order passed by the $$$ and haryana high court and was therefore not maintainable before the allahabad high court. respondent herein thereafter filed another $$$ before the punjab and haryana high court and on thdecember the high court held that since the $$$ was in the nature of an application for execution and full implementation of the order passed by the court a $$$ was not maintainable. it was however observed that the petitioner if so advised may file an application for executing the order passed by the court in writ petition no. of. in view of the observations of the high court in its order dated thdecember the respondent filed c.m. no. of in civil writ petition no. of being an application under order xxi rules and read with section c.p.c. praying that the application for execution of the order dated be allowed and the full amount / arrears with interest may be ordered to be paid. unfortunately this application was also dismissed as not maintainable on the ground that the applicant had earlier filed a contempt petition which came to be dismissed. it was observed that in case any amount was due and payable to the applicant his only remedy was to approach the civil court. against this order dated the petitioner respondent herein preferred a special leave petition before this court being slp c no. of. this court by its order dated $$$$ disposed of the special leave petition with the following observations:"the doubt of the petitioner is with regard to the final direction made in the impugned order i. the remedy to approach the civil court whether it is to approach execution court or to file a fresh suit for that remedy. in the circumstances he is at liberty to move the high court for review or clarification of the impugned order to clear the doubt. without prejudice to the rights of the petitioner to move the high court for that purpose the slp is dismissed. respondent herein then filed a review petition in execution application no. of which he had earlier filed in civil writ petition no. of decided on. this applicant was entertained by the high court and by an order dated $$$$ the review petition was allowed. application for execution of the order dated passed in civil writ petition no. of was also allowed. the learned judge held that the judgment and order no where indicated that the arrears were to be paid from the date of his joining and not from the date of his promotions. the corporation appellant herein was directed to pay the arrears to the respondent in terms of the aforesaid judgment and order dated. the court granted months ' time to the respondents in that application to complete the exercise. this order which was passed on thfebruary was challenged by way of letters patent appeal which was also dismissed by order dated 30thapril against which the instant appeal has been preferred by special leave. $$$ counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submitted that this was a case where notional promotion and seniority was given to the respondent. in such a case the concerned employee is entitled to the pay scale of the promotional post only with effect from the date he joins the post and not from the date of his promotion. he sought to rely on judgments of this court reported in $$$ / sc/0762/96$$$ / sc/0762/96 state of haryana and ors v. o.p. $$$ and ors. and paluru ramkrishnaiah and ors. etc. v. union of india and anr. on the other hand counsel for the respondent submitted that this is not a case where this court is called upon to consider the submission urged on behalf of the appellant. in the instant case the writ petition filed by the respondent was allowed by judgment and order dated passed in civil writ petition no. or. that order attained finality as it was not appealed from. in execution proceedings the appellant can not go beyond the order passed by the court in the writ petition and therefore what has to be considered is whether the high court was right in holding that in terms of the order of the court dated passed in civil writ petition no. of the respondent is entitled to the arrears of pay and allowances with effect from the date of promotions. if the answer is in the affirmative the question whether such relief ought to have been granted can not be agitated in execution proceeding. we find considerable force in the submission urged on behalf of the respondent. in these proceedings it is not permissible to go beyond the order of the learned judge dated passed in civil writ petition no. of. the execution application giving rise to the instant appeal was filed for implementing the order dated and in such proceeding it was not open to the appellant either to contend that the judgment and order dated was erroneous or that it required modification. the judgment and order aforesaid having attained finality has to be implemented without questioning its correctness. the appellant therefore can not be permitted to contend in these proceedings that the judgment and order dated was erroneous in as much as it directed the appellant to pay to the respondent arrears of salary with effect from the dates of promotion and not from the dates the respondent actually joined the promotional posts. the learned judge dealing with the execution application in our view rightly held that the order dated disposing of the writ petition clearly entitled the respondent to arrears of pay and allowances with effect from the dates of promotion and not from the dates he actually joined the promotional posts. we have earlier extracted the relevant part of the order passed by the learned judge. the order clearly directs the issuance of a writ of mandamus to give the benefit of pay fixation to the respondent as $$$ and $$$ i and also for consideration of his case for promotion to the post of assistant manager d from the date the persons junior to him were promoted. the order further directs that the arrears of pay shall be paid within month thereafter and in case it was not paid the petitioner respondent herein was to get interest @ % from the date of that order. the learned judge noticed the facts of the case that for no fault of the respondent and solely on account of the fact that his name was not included in the relevant panel by mistake he was deprived of his promotion to $$$ i and his further promotion to the cadre of assistant manager d. having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case the court was satisfied that the respondent was not only to be considered for promotion to the promotional posts but was also entitled to arrears of pay and allowances since he had been deprived of those benefits not on account of any fault of his but on account of the fault of the authorities concerned. it is well settled that in exercise of writ jurisdiction the court may mould the relief having regard to the facts of the case and interest of justice. in this appeal we are not called upon to pass a judgment on the correctness of the order passed by the learned judge in civil writ petition no. of dated. the only question that arises for consideration is whether under the said judgment and order the respondent is entitled to the arrears of pay and allowances from the dates of promotion. in our view the learned single judge as well as the division bench in letters patent appeal have correctly held that the respondent petitioner in the writ petition is entitled in terms of the order dated no arrears of pay and allowances with effect from the dates he was granted the promotions and not from the date he joined the promotional posts. no interference by this court in exercise of jurisdiction under article of the constitution of india is called for. this appeal is therefore dismissed with costs which is quantified at rs..