. in all these appeals the issue that arises for consideration is the same which relates to interpretation of exemption notification no. as amended and dutiability of the intermediary product $$$ obtained at an intermediary stage in the production of cement. the $$$ contends that as per rules and of the central excise rules no duty is payable in respect of the intermediate product $$$ which is utilised within the factory in the manufacture of cement. such $$$ is not dutiable. in the alternative it is submitted by the $$$ that even if $$$ is held to be dutiable it is exempted under exemption notification no.e.dated --. for the sake of convenience we take note of the facts from civil appeal no. of. the $$$ / assessee is the manufacturer of cement. for manufacturing of cement clinker is the raw material / input. $$$ is also manufactured by the $$$ in its factory located in the industrial growth centre in $$$. it is cleared from the factory upon payment of duty as a final product because of the reason that there is no exemption available in respect of clinker which is cleared from the factory as a final product and is dutiable. as mentid above cement is also produced by the $$$. $$$ and cement are dutiable products under chapter of the first schedule to the central excise tariff act which deals with salt sulphur $$$ and st plastering materials lime and cement. sub -heading.in this behalf which covers these products reads as under:. however cement is exempt from payment of duty under exemption notification no.e. manu / exct/004/00 dated --since it is manufactured and cleared from the factory of the $$$ which is located in the industrial growth centre in $$$. thus on this final product viz.cement no duty is payable as it is exempted from payment of duty. to this extent there is no dispute. in this manner the $$$ is a manufacturer who manufactures in the aforesaid factory a dutiable final product $$$ as well as exempted final product cement as contemplated in clause vi of the notification. on these facts we have to examine as to whether the product clinker is covered by the exemption notification no. the relevant portion of notification no. is extracted below:"exemption to all capital goods and inputs if captively consumed within the factory of production. -in exercise of the powers conferred by sub -section of section a of the central excise act of read with sub -section of section of the additional duties of excise goods of special importance act of hereinafter referred to as the said special importance act the central government being satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to do hereby exempts capital goods as defined in the cenvat credit rules manufactured in a factory and used within the factory of $$$ goods specified in column of the table hereto annexed hereinafter referred to as inputs manufactured in a factory and used within the factory of production in or in relation to the manufacture of final products specified in column of the said table;from the whole of the duty of excise leviable thereon which is specified in the schedules to the central excise tariff act of or additional duty of excise leviable thereon which is specified in the schedule to the said special importance act provided that nothing contained in this notification shall apply to inputs used in or in relation to the manufacture of final products which are exempt from the whole of the duty of excise or additional duty of excise leviable thereon or are chargeable to nil rate of duty other than those goods which are cleared to a unit in a free trade z to a percent export oriented undertaking i to a unit in an electronic hardware technology part or(iv to a unit in a software technology part or(v under notification no. excise dated the th august or(vi by a manufacturer of dutiable and exempted final products after discharging the obligation prescribed in rule of the cenvat credit rules. as per clause ii with which we are concerned goods specified under column of the table which are inputs and manufactured in a factory and used within the factory of production in or in relation to manufacture of the final products specified in column of the said table are exempted from payment of excise duty. thus if the input is specified in column and it is manufactured in its factory and at the same time captively used in or in relation to the manufacture of the final product the same is exempted from duty. if were to apply this clause there is no dispute that clinker would be an item which would be covered by column of the table as column of the table mentions of goods falling under the first schedule to the central excise tariff act with the exception of certain goods inputs specifically excluded and clinker is not of those inputs. however proviso appended to this notification excludes those inputs where these are used in or in relation to the manufacture of the final product and that final product is also exempt. in the present case we find that the clinker is used as input for production of cement and cement is exempted from the excise duty. therefore by virtue of this proviso insofar as clinker is concerned exemption notification would not apply. however the matter does not end here inasmuch as the proviso itself is not applicable under certain circumstances as mentioned therein viz.in respect of those goods which are cleared under circumstances. we are concerned here with clause vi which states that if goods are cleared by a manufacturer of dutiable and exempted final products after discharging the obligation prescribed in rule of the cenvat credit rules then proviso would not apply. therefore the outcome of this case depends upon the answer to the question as to whether in the instant case the $$$s are discharging the obligation prescribed in rule of the cenvat credit rules. on facts there is no dispute that $$$s have discharged the obligation prescribed in rule of the cenvat credit rules. the respondent have not even disputed the same. the case set up by the $$$ therefore was that since the exempted goods cement is cleared by the $$$ who is a manufacturer of dutiable final products clinker and exempted final products cement after discharging the obligation prescribed in rule of the cenvat credit rules clause vi of the notification applies. in such a case exemption is available in respect of clinker which is captively consumed in the manufacture of cement as per the opening part of the notification. the customs excise and service tax appellate tribunal for short cestat has disallowed the exemption in respect of clinker as claimed above. as per the cestat rule applies only if some final product is partly exempt and partly dutiable. however we do not find any such restriction in rule which contemplates the situation where a manufacturer produces a final products which are chargeable to duty as well as exempted goods. the rule does not provide that the same final product should be partly dutiable and partly exempted. on the contrary this rule relates to taking of cenvat credit in respect of inputs. this rule is not applicable as such in its totality since taking of cenvat credit is not in issue in these cases. on the other hand relevance of this rule is only to the extent of obligation contained in the said rule which is to be discharged. a plain reading of clause vi of the notification would show that it only contemplates a situation where a manufacturer manufactures both dutiable as well as exempt final products. there may be different final products manufactured by the same manufacturer. the final products may be made out of the same product or out of different products. clause vi does not contemplate that the manufacturer should manufacture only final product or that if he manufactures only product that product itself should be both dutiable and exempted. the basis adopted by the cestat that the same final product should be partly dutiable and partly exempt is neither a requirement of clause vi nor a requirement of rule. in view of the aforesaid discussion we are of the opinion that the cestat decision is erroneous and is liable to be set aside. we thus allow these appeals and quash the order of the cestat. no costs.