$$$ no. of. it is not disputed that the driving licence of the driver of the vehicle had expired on --and the driver did not apply for renewal within days of the expiry of the said licence as required under section of the motor vehicles act. it is also not disputed that the driver of the vehicle did not have driving licence when the accident took place. according to the terms of the contract the insurance company has no liability to pay any compensation where an accident takes place by a vehicle driven by a driver without a driving licence. in that view of the matter we do not find any merit in the appeal. the appeal fails and is accordingly dismissed. there shall be no order as to costs.$$$s nos. -of @ slps civil nos. -of and -of. leave granted. we have heard counsel for the appellant. on --a stage carriage belonging to haryana state roadways transport corporation met in an accident with a tempo which was carrying passengers. as a result of the said accident passengers travelling in the tempo died and several other passengers received injuries. subsequently the dependants of the deceased and the injured persons filed separate petitions for compensation before the motor accidents claims tribunal. the tribunal found that the aforesaid accident took place due to negligence of the driver of the vehicle owned by haryana state roadways transport corporation and therefore fastened the liability of compensation on the corporation. the tribunal awarded different amounts of compensation to different dependants of the deceased and the injured. aggrieved the state of haryana and another preferred appeals before the high court but the same were dismissed. it is against the said judgment of the high court the appellants have come up to this court. $$$ counsel urged that the appeals of the appellants were dismissed without considering the evidence on record and the same therefore deserve to be set aside. we do not find any merit in the contention. admittedly the appellants led no evidence before the tribunal and therefore they can not make any grievance that the evidence was not considered by the high court. no other point was pressed. the appeals are accordingly dismissed. there shall be no order as to costs.$$$ no. of. the appellants herein are the wife and children of the deceased who died in a motor accident. the deceased a qualified doctor was in government service. the appellants filed a claim petition before the motor accidents claims tribunal. the tribunal awarded compensation to the extent of rs. and a sum of rs. on other heads. the claimants were not satisfied with the award of compensation therefore preferred an appeal before the high court. the high court found that the income of the deceased was rs. per annum and after deducting of the amount total dependency was rs. the high court by applying the multiplier of enhanced the compensation to rs. from rs. along with interest at the rate of per cent. the claimants still not satisfied with the award of compensation have come up in appeal. $$$ counsel appearing for the appellants urged that the multiplier applied by the high court was erroneous and in fact the multiplier of ought to have been applied in the present case. $$$ counsel in support of his argument relied upon the decision of this court in u.p. srtc v. $$$ manu / $$$ / sc/14/6. it is not disputed that the appellant was years of age and was earning a sum of rs. $$$$. in view of the facts and circumstances of the case we are of the view that the multiplier of was correctly applied while awarding compensation. the decision relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellants is also of no assistance to his arguments. in the said decision in para this court found that the amount awarded by the high court was excessive however on the facts and circumstances of that case this court did not interfere in the matter. in that view of the matter we do not find any merit in the appeal which accordingly fails and is dismissed. there shall be no order as to costs.$$$ no. of. it is not disputed that there was a limited liability of the insurance company. in that view of the matter we do not find any merit in the appeal. it is accordingly dismissed. there shall be no order as to costs. $$$s nos. -of. after we heard the matter we find that these appeals stand concluded by a decision of the constitution bench of this court in the case of new india assurance co. ltd. v. c.m. jaya manu / sc/0031/$$$$manu / sc/0031/$$$$. in that view of the matter the appeals fail and are accordingly dismissed. there shall be no order as to costs. $$$ no. of. in view of the fact that the amount involved is petty we are not inclined to interfere in the matter. the appeal is dismissed. no costs.$$$ no. of @ slp civil no. of. leave granted. the appellants are the widow and children of the deceased e.v. $$$ who died in a motor vehicle accident. the appellants filed a claim petition before the motor accidents claims tribunal claiming compensation. the tribunal found that the deceased himself was negligent and therefore declined to grant any compensation to the claimants. aggrieved the appellants preferred an appeal before the high court. the high court after considering the matter found that there was contributory negligence and therefore the appellants were entitled to a compensation of rs. with per cent interest. the high court arrived at the aforesaid figure of compensation by applying multiplier of. the appellants not satisfied with the grant of compensation have preferred this appeal. we have perused the record and find that the multiplier of applied by the high court in determining the compensation to the claimants was not appropriate. it is not disputed that the deceased was a bank employee and was years of age at the time of accident. it is also not disputed that after deduction of of the amount total loss of dependency was rs. per month. it is also not disputed that the age of superannuation of the deceased employee was years and years of service were still left to serve. in view of the facts and circumstances of this case we are of the view that in the present case the multiplier of ought to have been applied by the high court. on application of multiplier of the total amount of compensation comes to rs. the respondent company has already deposited its share of compensation at the rate awarded by the high court. since the liability of the insurance company is per cent of the enhanced amount the respondent company shall pay the balance amount along with the interest at the rate of per cent on the enhanced amount from the date of this order. with the aforesaid modification of the judgment under challenge the appeal is disposed of. no costs.