d.m. dharmadhikari j. in this appeal which is filed after obtaining special leave the order dated th may of the high court of delhi has been assailed. the main question involved is on the application and interpretation of the provisions of section of the income tax act hereinafter referred to as the act.the relevant facts necessary for deciding the legal question raised are as under. the appellant 's lands were acquired under section of the land acquisition act and an award was passed on.by the chief commissir of delhi granting compensation in favour of the appellant. the additional district judge by judgment dated.held the appellant entitled to share of the compensation awarded under various awards and the appellant was granted total compensation in the sum of rs.,,/- approximately in the $$$$. on a reference under section of the land acquisition act the learned additional district judge delhi vide his judgment dated.awarded a sum of rs. the amount was paid to the appellant between.and.. the amounts paid represented principal sum of compensation of rs. and interest in the sum of rs.upto.. before making the above payments tax was deducted at source amounting to rs. since the lands acquired were agricultural lands and were acquired prior to.capital gains tax was not leviable but tax was leviable on interest earned on the amount awarded on $$$$ basis. the appellant through counsel sent a letter dated.informing the ito that he had received interest amount of rs.and interest accrued from $$$$ to $$$$ was assessable in each $$$$. $$$$ -wise break up of the interest was also given in the letter. according to the appellant no tax was leviable on interest accruing up to.as assessment for it had become barred by time. the appellant therefore requested that necessary action be taken under section of the act to enable the appellant as assessee to file his income tax return and pay tax accordingly. on.the appellant was served with impugned notices under section of the act for assessments years i.-to -and assessments years -to -. the appellant in the high court assailed the notices issued under section of the act for reassessment for $$$$s -to -and for the year -on the ground that the proposed reassessment for those assessment years had already become barred by time under section of the act for which in the relevant periods maximum period of years or years limitation was prescribed depending upon the quantum of liability towards tax. the high court by the impugned judgment accepted the contention of the department that the provisions of section of the act as amended with effect from.could be resorted to for reassessment to levy tax on the increased amount of interest earned by the appellant in the relevant assessment years. it was held that bar of limitation prescribed under section of the act was not attracted by virtue of the provisions of section because notices for such reassessments are based on the awards passed in the land acquisition proceedings by the court of the additional district judge on a reference under section of the land acquisition act. upholding the validity of the assessment proceedings initiated by the department under section of the act the high court rejected the contention of the assessee that sub -section of section of the act is an explanation to sub -section and proceedings for reassessment which had already become barred by time under section of the act before.could not have been commenced on the amended provisions of sub- section of section. to appreciate the contentions advanced by learned counsel for the parties and the decision of the high court it is necessary to reproduce for critical examination the provisions of section and of the act. the provisions read as under:"0 notwithstanding anything contained in section the notice under section may be issued at any time for the purpose of making an assessment or reassessment or recomputation in consequence of or to give effect to any finding or direction contained in an order passed by any authority in any proceeding under this act by way of appeal reference or revision or by a court in any proceeding under any other law][the portion bracketed and underlined above is inserted by the direct tax $$$s amendment act with effect from..the provisions of sub -section shall not apply in any case where any such assessment reassessment or recomputation as is referred to in that sub -section relates to an assessment year in respect of which an assessment reassessment or recomputation could not have been made at the time the order which was the subject -matter of the appeal reference or revision as the case may be was made by reason of any other provision limiting the time within which any action for assessment reassessment or recomputation may be taken. section of the act prescribes maximum period of or years depending upon the quantum of tax as mentid in the said section for initiating reassessment proceedings. section states that the period of limitation prescribed in section is not applicable if the reassessment is proposed on the basis of any order passed by any authority in any proceedings under the act by way of appeal reference or revision or by court in proceedings under any other law. sub -section of section however makes it clear that reassessment permissible under sub -section of section would not be available to the department where the period of limitation for such assessment or reassessment has expired at the time it is proposed to be reopened. in sub -section of section by direct tax $$$s amendment act with effect from.the words or by a court in any proceeding under any other law were inserted which are shown in bracket with underline in the section reproduced above. the main question that has been raised on behalf of the learned counsel appearing for the parties is whether the provisions of sub -section of section as amended can be availed for reopening assessments which have attained finality and could not be reopened due to bar of limitation that was attracted at the relevant time to the proposed reassessment proceedings under the provisions of section of the act. the submission made on behalf of the appellant is that neither the provisions of sub -section nor sub -section can be read as giving more than intended operation to the said provision. the provisions it is argued do not permit the authorities to reopen assessments which have become final and reassessment of which had become barred by time before.when section was amended. reliance is placed on the decision of this court in s.s.$$$ v. lal and co. reported in manu / sc/0/96manu / sc/0/96. the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the department has made an effort to persuade this court to accept his construction of the provisions of section and of the act. it is argued that it is for the specific purpose of assessing income which might accrue on the basis of any decision of any court in any proceeding in any other law that the provision has been amended to lift bar of limitation for reassessment. fiscal statute more particularly on a provision such as the present regulating period of limitation must receive strict construction. $$$ of limitation is intended to give certainty and finality to legal proceedings and to avoid exposure to risk of litigation to litigant for indefinite period on future unforeseen events. proceedings which have attained finality under existing law due to bar of limitation can not be held to be open for revival unless the amended provision is clearly given retrospective operation so as to allow upsetting of proceedings which had already been concluded and attained finality. the amendment to sub -section of section is not expressed to be retrospective and therefore has to be held as only prospective. the amendment made to sub -section of section which intends to lift embargo of period of limitation under section to enable authorities to reopen assessments not only on the basis of orders passed in proceedings under the it act but also on order of a court in any proceedings under any law has to be applied prospectively on or after.when the said amendment was introduced to sub -section. the provision in sub -section therefore can have only prospective operation to assessments which have not become final due to expiry of period of limitation prescribed for assessment under section of the act. to hold that the amendment to sub -section would enable the authorities to reopen assessments which had already attained finality due to bar of limitation prescribed under section of the act as applicable prior to.would amount to giving sub -section a retrospective operation which is neither expressly nor impliedly intended by the amended sub -section. on behalf of the assessee before the high court and in this court reliance has been placed on the provisions contained in sub -section of section. it is submitted that the provision contained in sub -section of section is in the nature of clarification or explanation to sub -section. sub -section makes it clear that the embargo of period of limitation lifted under sub -section for proposed reassessments based on order in proceedings appeal reference or revision as the case may be would not apply to assessments which have attained finality due to bar of limitation applicable at the relevant time. the high court rejected the above contention of the assessee on the ground that on the amendment introduced with effect from.in sub -section which enables reopening of assessment based on any order of court in any proceedings in any law there is no corresponding amendment made in sub -section of section to bar reassessment based on order of court passed in any proceedings in any law in cases where prescribed period of litigation for reassessment had already expired. we do not find the above reasoning of the high court is sound. the plain language of sub -section of section clearly restricts application of sub -section to enable the authority to reopen assessments which have not already become final on the expiry of prescribed period of limitation under section. as is sought to be done by the high court sub -section of section can not be held applicable only to reassessments based on orders ' in proceedings under the act and not to orders of court in proceedings under any other law. such an interpretation would make the whole provision under section discriminatory in its application to assessments sought to be reopened on the basis of orders under the it act and other assessments proposed to be reopened on the basis of orders under any other law. interpretation which creates such unjust and discriminatory situation has to be avoided. we do not find that sub -section of section has that result. sub -section intends to insulate all proceedings of assessments which have attained finality due to the then existing bar of limitation. to achieve the desired result it was not necessary to make any amendment in sub -section corresponding to sub -section as is the reasoning adopted by the high court. sub -section aims at putting embargo on reopening assessments which have attained finality on expiry of prescribed period of limitation. sub -section in putting such embargo refers to whole of sub -section meaning thereby to insulate all assessments which have become final and may have been found liable to reassessments or re -computation either on the basis of orders in proceedings under the act or orders of courts passed under any other law. the high court therefore was in error in not reading whole of amended sub -section into sub -section and coming to the conclusion that reassessment proposed on the basis of order of court in proceedings under land acquisition act could be commenced even though the original assessments for $$$$ in question have attained finality on expiry of period of limitation under section of the act. on a combined reading of sub -section as amended with effect from.and sub -section of section as it stands in our view a fair and just interpretation would be that the authority under the act has been empowered only to reopen assessments which have not already been closed and attained finality due to the operation of the bar of limitation under section. this court took similar view in the case of s.s.$$$ supra in somewhat comparable situation arising from the retrospective operation given to section (i of income tax act as amended with retrospective effect from.by the finance act of. in the case of s.s.$$$ supra admittedly under clause iii of the proviso to section (i of the indian income tax act as it then stood a notice of assessment or reassessment could not be issued against a person deemed to be an agent of a non -resident under section after the expiry of year from $$$$ of assessment. the section was amended by section of the finance act extending this period of limitation to years from the end of $$$$. the amended was given retrospective effect from april. on march the income tax officer issued a notice calling upon the assessee to show cause why in respect of $$$$ -the assessee should not be treated as an agent under section in respect of certain non -residents. the case of the assessee inter alia was that the proposed action was barred by limitation as right to commence proceedings of assessment against the assessee as an agent of non -resident for $$$$ -ended on.under the act before it was amended in. this court in the case of s.s. gadgil supra accepted the contention of the assessee and held as under..the legislature has given to section of the finance act only a limited retrospective operation i.up to april only. that provision must be read subject to the rule that in the absence of an express provision or clear implication the legislature does not intend to attribute to the amending provision a greater retrospectivity than is expressly mentioned nor to authorise the income -tax officer to commence proceedings which before the new act came into force had by the expiry of the period provided become barred. on a proper construction of the provisions of section and the effect of its operation from.we are clearly of the opinion that the provisions can not be given retrospective effect prior to.for assessments which have already become final due to bar of limitation prior to.. taxing provision imposing a liability is governed by normal presumption that it is not retrospective and settled principle of law is that the law to be applied is that which is in force in $$$$ unless otherwise provided expressly or by necessary implication. even a procedural provision can not in the absence of clear contrary intendment expressed therein be given greater retrospectivity than is expressly mentioned so as to enable the authorities to affect finality of tax assessments or to open up liabilities which have become barred by lapse of time. our conclusion therefore is that sub -section of section as amended with effect from.does not enable the authorities to reopen assessments which have become final due to bar of limitation prior to.and this position is applicable equally to reassessments proposed on the basis of orders passed under the act or under any other law. as a result of the discussion aforesaid the appeal is allowed. the judgment of the high court of delhi dated.is hereby set aside. as prayed in the petition the impugned notices issued by the respondent of the income tax department under sections and of the act against the appellant for the assessment years -to -and -are hereby quashed. the appeal stands allowed with costs.