kurian joseph, j.1. leave granted in special leave petition (civil) no. 12495 of 20152. around 46.93 acres of land was acquired by the respondent-state of haryana initiating the proceedings by notification dated 19.09.1983 issued under section 4 of the land acquisition act, 1894. the purpose of acquisition is residential and commercial for panchkula, sector-21. the acquired property is in village fatehpur. in respect of the same development, we have seen that this court in many cases has based the fixation of the land value based on acquisition proceedings initiated in 1981 in village judian. those properties in village judian had access to state highway and the value fixed by this court is rs. 250/- per square yard. in respect of properties situated in the adjoining village of the appellants namely, devi nagar, we have fixed land value at the rate of rs. 250/- per square yard that was the acquisition initiated in the year 1987 and that property had extensive national highway frontage.3. learned counsel for the appellants submitted that in all the adjoining villages for the properties acquired for the same purpose, this court having fixed the land value at rs. 250/- per square yard and above, the appellants may also be granted the same value.4. shri sanjay kumar tyagi, learned additional advocate general for the respondent-state of haryana however points out that even according to the appellants, their claim was only rs. 125/- per square yard and in any case the land of the appellants does not have the same advantage when compared to other properties for which this court had fixed the land value at rs. 250/- per square yard and above.5. learned counsel appearing for the appellants however points out that in the matter of fixation of just and fair compensation, the court is not bound by claim made by the owner. it is for the court, in the facts and circumstances of each case, to award just and fair compensation.6. prior to amendment act 68 of 1984, the amount of compensation that could be awarded by the court was limited to the amount claimed by the applicant. section 25 read as under-section 25. rules as to amount of compensation-(1) when the applicant has made a claim to compensation, pursuant to any notice given under section 9, the amount awarded to him by the court shall not exceed the amount so claimed or be less than the amount awarded by the collector under section 11.(2) when the applicant has refused to make such claim or has omitted without sufficient reason (to be allowed by the judge) to make such claim, the amount awarded by the court shall in no case exceed the amount awarded by the collector.(3) when the applicant has omitted for a sufficient reason (to be allowed by the judge) to make such claim, the amount awarded to him by the court shall not be less than, and may exceed, the amount awarded by the collector.the amended section 25 reads as under:section 25. amount of compensation awarded by court not to be lower than the amount awarded by the collector- the amount of compensation awarded by the court shall not be less than the amount awarded by the collector under section 11.the amendment has come into effect on 24.09.1984.7. the pre-amended provision put a cap on the maximum; the compensation by court should not be beyond the amount claimed. the amendment in 1984, on the contrary, put a cap on the minimum; compensation cannot be less that what was awarded by the land acquisition collector. the cap on maximum having been expressly omitted, and the cap that is put is only on minimum, it is clear that the amount of compensation that a court can award is no longer restricted to the amount claimed by the applicant. it is the duty of the court to award just and fair compensation taking into consideration the true market value and other relevant factors, irrespective of the claim made by the owner.8. although in the context of the motor vehicles act, 1988, this court in sanjay batham v. munna lal parihar manu/sc/1280/2011manu/sc/1280/2011 : (2010) 11 scc 665 held that-17. it is true that in the petition filed by him under section 166 of the act, the appellant had claimed compensation of rs. 4,20,000/- only, but as held in nagappa v. gurudayal singh manu/sc/1107/2002manu/sc/1107/2002 : (2003) 2 scc 274, in the absence of any bar in the act, the tribunal and for that reason any competent court is entitled to award higher compensation to the victim of an accident.9. in bhag singh and ors. v. union territory of chandigarh manu/sc/0265/1985manu/sc/0265/1985 : (1985) 3 scc 737, this court held that there may be situations where the amount higher than claimed may be awarded to the claimant. the court observed-3. ... it must be remembered that this was not a dispute between two private citizens where it would be quite just and legitimate to confine the claimant to the claim made by him and not to award him any higher amount than that claimed though even in such a case there may be situations where an amount higher than that claimed can be awarded to the claimant as for instance where an amount is claimed as due at the foot of an account. here was a claim made by the appellants against the state government for compensation for acquisition of their land and under the law, the state was bound to pay to the appellants compensation on the basis of the market value of the land acquired and if according to the judgments of the learned single judge and the division bench, the market value of the land acquired was higher than that awarded by the land acquisition collector or the additional district judge, there is no reason why the appellants should have been denied the benefit of payment of the market value so determined. to deny this benefit to the appellants would tantamount to permitting the state government to acquire the land of the appellants on payment of less than the true market value. there may be cases where, as for instance, under' agrarian reform legislation, the holder of land may, legitimately, as a matter of social justice with a view to eliminating concentration of land in the hands of a few and bringing about its equitable distribution, be deprived of land which is not being personally cultivated by him or which is in excess of the ceiling area with payment of little compensation or no compensation at all, but where land is acquired under the land acquisition act, 1894, it would not be fair and just to deprive the holder of his land without payment of the true market value when the law, in so many terms, declares that he shall be paid such market value....10. in krishi utpadan mandi samiti v. kanhaiya lal manu/sc/0625/2000manu/sc/0625/2000 : (2000) 7 scc 756, this court held that under the amended provisions of section 25 of the act, the court can grant a higher compensation than claimed by the applicant in his pleadings-17. award being in this case between the dates 30th april, 1982 and 24th september, 1984 and as per the union of india and anr. v. raghubir singh (dead) by l.rs. etc. (supra), the amended provisions would be applicable under which there is no restriction that award could only be upto the amount claimed by the claimant. hence high court order granting compensation more than what is claimed cannot be said to be illegal or contrary to the provisions of the act. hence the review itself, as is confined for the aforesaid reasons, has no merit.11. further, in bhimasha v. special land acquisition officer and ors. manu/sc/8775/2008manu/sc/8775/2008 : (2008) 10 scc 797, a three-judge bench reiterated the principle in bhag singh (supra) and rejected the contention that a higher compensation than claimed by the owner in his pleadings cannot be awarded by the court. in that case, the high court had concluded that although the market price of the land was rs. 66,550/- per acre, since the appellant had only claimed compensation at the rate of rs. 58,500/- per acre in his pleadings, therefore he could only be awarded compensation limited to his claim. this court, while reversing the decision of the high court, awarded the petitioner the market value, i.e., rs. 66,550/- per acre thereby holding that the award would not be limited to the claim made by him.12. in the case of the appellants herein, it is an admitted position that the properties do not abut the national highway. admittedly, it is situated about 375 yards away from the national highway and it appears that there is only the narrow nahan kothi road connecting the properties of the appellants to the national highway. therefore, it will not be just and proper to award land value of rs. 250/- per square yard, which is granted to the property in adjoining village. having regard to the factual and legal position obtained above, we are of the considered view that the just and fair compensation in the case of appellants would be rs. 200/- per square yard.13. therefore, these appeals are disposed off fixing the land value at rs. 200/- per square yard and the appellants shall also be entitled to all the statutory benefits. the amount as above shall be paid and deposited after adjusting the deficit court fee, if any, before the executing court within a period of three months from today.
abhay manohar sapre, j.1. delay in filing special leave petition is condoned. leave granted.2. this appeal is filed against the final judgment and order dated 08.04.2015 of the high court of judicature at patna in cwjc no. 5402 of 2015 whereby the high court while disposing of the appellant's writ petition granted liberty to file representation to the national thermal power corporation (ntpc) but at the same time passed an order that the appellants will have no liberty to move the high court again for the same cause of action raised therein.3. we have heard learned counsel for the appellant and have perused the record of the case.4. having heard learned counsel for the appellant, we are inclined to dispose of this appeal after granting leave at the admission stage itself as we are of the view that the same can be disposed of without notice to the other side.5. in the light of the order that we have passed, it is neither necessary to set out the facts of the case in detail and as mentioned above nor necessary to issue notice of this appeal to the other side.6. the impugned order passed by the high court reads as under:after some arguments, learned counsel for the petitioners seeks permission to withdraw this application in order to enable the petitioners to file representation before the competent authority of the national thermal power corporation (ntpc). while this court would accord such leave to the petitioner but it is made clear that the petitioners will have now no liberty to move this court again for the same cause of action raised herein.7. the only grievance of learned counsel for the appellant is that the high court having rightly granted liberty to the appellant to file the representation for ventilating his grievance before the ntpc erred in taking away his right to prosecute his grievance, if occasion arises in future depending upon the outcome of his representation. it is his submission that the appellant has every right to take recourse to all legal remedies as are available to him in law in the event any adverse order is passed on his representation or when no orders are passed on his representation once made. we find force in this submission.8. in our considered view, the high court having rightly granted indulgence to the appellant to file the representation to the ntpc for ventilating his grievance, should have also granted liberty to the appellant to take recourse to all legal remedies to challenge the decision once taken on his representation, if occasion so arises.9. a right to prosecute the legal remedy in the court of law to challenge any decision of the state or/and its agency is a valuable legal right of the citizen and the high court could not take away such right from the appellant without assigning any reason. there is apparently no justifiable reason to deny the appellant from taking recourse to the legal remedies to prosecute his grievance in a court of law in relation to the dispute, which is the subject matter of the representation in case if occasion arises in future.10. in the light of foregoing discussion, we allow the appeal in part and set aside that part of the impugned order, which deprives the appellant to move to the court again in the event his representation is decided against him by the ntpc.11. we, therefore, grant the appellant further liberty to take recourse to all legal remedies, as may be available to him in law, by approaching appropriate court to ventilate his grievance, if occasion arises, in relation to the dispute for which he is granted liberty by the high court to file the representation.
pinaki chandra ghose, j.1. this criminal appeal, by special leave, is directed against the impugned common judgment dated june 17, 2009 of the high court of gujarat whereby the high court dismissed criminal appeal no. 1327 of 2004 filed by the appellants and confirmed the order passed by the trial court. the high court in the present matter upheld the sentence as awarded by the trial court by stating that the evidence led by the complainant (pw-1), the elder sister of the deceased (pw-8) and the grandfather of the deceased (pw-9) gets support from the evidence led by pw-7, who are the friends and relatives of the deceased.2. the case of the prosecution is that the marriage between truptiben (the deceased) and the appellant no. 3 herein took place on 01.05.1996. truptiben was the daughter of one kantilal dhanjibhai karia of district rajkot in gujarat. after the marriage, truptiben was residing in a joint family with her in-laws appellant nos. 1 and 2 and her husband appellant no. 3 at morbi, gujarat. out of the said wedlock, a girl named gopi was born.3. on 23.03.2000 at around 1130 hrs, while kantilal dhanjibhai karia was discharging his duties in the bank of baroda at rajkot, he received a telephonic message from appellant no. 1, that his daughter is hanging by the fan and that he may immediately come to morbi. kantilal dhanjibhai karia informed about the said telephonic message to his nearest relatives and thereafter, they all proceeded towards morbi.4. in the meantime, appellant no. 1 had informed about the said incident to morbi city police station. the p.s.o., who was on duty at the relevant time, made the relevant entry in the station register and directed the asi to investigate the matter. the asi went to the scene of the offence and carried out preliminary investigation. he recorded the statement of appellant no. 1 and thereafter, sent a yaadi to the p.s.o. to register the incident as an accidental death, which came to be registered as a.d. no. 16/2000. thereafter, investigation into the said incident was taken over by police inspector mr. jaynarayan rameshwar srivastav. the investigating officer informed kantilal dhanjibhai karia, the father of the deceased, of the said incident and in return he asked the investigating officer not to disturb the position of the dead body of his daughter till he arrives at morbi.5. the said kantilal dhanjibhai karia, the father of the deceased arrived at 1500 hrs on the same day. he felt something fishy behind the death of her daughter truptiben, as the appellants had demanded dowry several times in the past, which was further strengthened by the fact that none of the appellants were present in the house at the relevant point of time.6. on the same day, i.e. on 23.03.2000, in the evening hours, a criminal complaint with regard to the said incident was filed by the father of the deceased against the appellants, which ultimately, came to be registered as i-c.r. no. 92/2000 for offence punishable under sections 498a, 304b & 306 read with section 114 of the indian penal code. the body of the deceased was taken off the fan and sent for post-mortem examination. the investigation was carried out and the statements of several witnesses were recorded.7. after the registration of the complaint against the appellants, an arrest warrant was issued by the concerned judicial magistrate, 1st class, morbi on report filed by the investigating officer under section 70 code of criminal procedure but the appellants were untraceable. they were absconding for a period of thirty six days and ultimately on 29.04.2000 at around 2130 hrs., the appellants surrendered themselves at the morbi city police station.8. the appellants were produced in the court of the district & addl. sessions judge, fast track court no. 7, morbi in sessions case no. 52/2000 and the trial was held. during the trial, the witnesses were examined at length. the witnesses pw-1, pw-8 and pw-9 stated that the deceased used to complain about the mental torture and harassment frequently meted out to her by the accused due to the insufficient dowry provided during the marriage. this evidence was supported by pw-7, the friend of the deceased who stated that the deceased had informed her that she was subject to frequent mental torture and harassment by the accused for bringing less dowry. this witness was also cross-examined at length by the other side alike the other witnesses and based on the evidence provided by the witnesses, the accused were convicted for the offences punishable under sections 498a, 304b & 306 indian penal code read with section 114 indian penal code.9. aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the aforesaid judgment and order passed by the sessions court, the appellants preferred an appeal before the high court. the counsel for the appellants contended before the high court that the evidence stated by the relatives of the deceased are interested witnesses and their statements could not be solely relied upon.10. the high court opined out that the deceased died of a suicidal death is not a dispute though the evidence on record, more particularly, the photographs of the dead body at exhibits 49/1 to 49/7 and the inquest panchnama, say an altogether different story. the high court further observed that since it was an appeal under section 374 code of criminal procedure it did not want to enter into the other aspect of the case and instead focus on the present appeal. the evidence led by the complainant (pw-1), the elder sister (pw-8) and the grandfather of the deceased (pw-9) gets support from the evidence led by (pw-7) who are the friend and relatives of the deceased. the high court further opined out that the evidence of pw-1, pw-7, pw-8 and pw-9 clearly establishes that the appellants were greedy people, who had started to demand dowry right from the date of marriage i.e. on 01.05.1996. it is the case of the appellants that the essential ingredient of section 304b indian penal code regarding the existence of cruelty soon before the death has not been established by the prosecution. the high court thus upheld the ultimate conclusion and the resultant order of conviction recorded by the trial court.11. we have heard the learned counsels on both the sides.12. the counsel for the appellant contended that the prosecution has failed to substantiate the guilt of the appellants under sections 306 and 304b of indian penal code. the counsel further contended that to satisfy the conditions of sections 304b and 306 of the indian penal code, it must be shown that the deceased was incited, provided or virtually driven to committing suicide by the accused. the counsel for the appellant stated that in the case of kishori lal v. state of m.p. manu/sc/7815/2007manu/sc/7815/2007 : (2007) 10 scc 797, this court has held that in cases of alleged abetment of suicide there must be proof of direct or indirect acts of incitement to the commission of suicide. the mere fact that the husband treated wife with cruelty is not enough.13. the counsel for the appellants further stated that in the case of sushil kumar sharma v. union of india manu/sc/0418/2005manu/sc/0418/2005 : (2005) 6 scc 281, this court has held that the object of section 498a of the indian penal code is to get to the root of dowry menace and its unleashing will lead to a legal terrorism. the provision is to be used as a shield and not as an assassin's weapon. the counsel further contended that in the case of sakatar singh and ors. v. state of haryana manu/sc/0352/2004manu/sc/0352/2004 : (2004) 11 scc 291, this court has held that such evidence which is not based on the personal knowledge of the witness cannot be the foundation for basing of conviction. the learned counsel for the appellant further contended that in the case of m. srinivasulu v. state of a.p. manu/sc/7892/2007manu/sc/7892/2007 : (2007) 12 scc 443, it was held by this court that a presumption under section 113b of the indian evidence act can be only raised in case of dowry death, if there is concrete proof of cruelty and harassment meted out to the deceased by the accused. the learned counsel for the appellants further contended that merely because the accused was absconding, the said fact cannot be made the basis for inferring his guilt. the learned counsel cited the case of matru v. state of u.p., reported in manu/sc/0141/1971manu/sc/0141/1971 : (1971) 2 scc 75, where it has been held that the appellants' conduct in absconding by itself does not necessarily lead to a firm conclusion of guilty mind. even an innocent man may feel panicky and try to evade arrest when wrongly suspected of a grave crime.14. we would like to conclude that going by the version provided by pw-1, pw-7, pw-8 and pw-9, there is a reasonable apprehension of the crime committed by the accused. with regard to the position of law involving applicability of sections 498a, 304b and 306 of the indian penal code, in the case of balwant singh and ors. v. state of himachal pradesh manu/sc/4359/2008manu/sc/4359/2008 : (2008) 15 scc 497, it has been held that section 304b and section 498a of the indian penal code are not mutually inclusive. if an accused is acquitted under one section, it does not mean that the accused cannot be convicted under another section. according to section 113b of the indian evidence act, presumption arises when a woman has committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of the marriage. in this case, after going through the documentary evidence and the version of the witnesses, the accused were convicted under sections 304b and 498a of the indian penal code. in the present case that we are dealing with, a reasonable apprehension can be raised, for that the accused committed a crime under section 304b of the indian penal code and a presumption can be raised under section 113b of the indian evidence act, since seven years of marriage had not been completed.15. with regard to the applicability of sections 113a and 113b of the indian evidence act, in the case of state of punjab v. iqbal singh and ors. manu/sc/0354/1991manu/sc/0354/1991 : (1991) 3 scc 1, this court observed that the legislative intent is clear to curb the menace of dowry deaths, etc, with a firm hand. it must be remembered that since crimes are generally committed in the privacy of residential homes, it is not easy to gather direct evidence in such cases. that is why the legislature has by introducing sections 113a and 113b of the indian evidence act, tried to strengthen the prosecution hands by permitting a presumption to be raised if certain foundational facts are established and the unfortunate event has taken place within a period of seven years.16. with regard to whether any direct link has been shown between dowry demand and death, in the case of dinesh v. state of haryana manu/sc/0364/2014manu/sc/0364/2014 : 2014 (5) scale 641, the accused has been convicted under sections 113b and 304b of the indian penal code, on the basis of presumption, since certain foundational facts were established. in the present case, it has been established from the versions of pw-1, pw-7, pw-8 and pw-9 that there was a demand for dowry and the deceased was being mentally harassed.17. in the case of thanu ram v. state of m.p. manu/sc/0796/2010manu/sc/0796/2010 : (2010) 10 scc 353, this court has observed certain criteria with regard to establishment of guilt in the cases of dowry death. the first criterion being that the suicide must have been committed within seven years of marriage. the second criterion is that the husband or some relative of the husband had subjected the victim to cruelty, which led to the commission of suicide by the victim. this is when section 113a of the indian evidence act indicates that in such circumstances, the court may presume, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, that such suicide has been abetted by her husband or by such relative of her husband. in the present case that we are dealing with, both the above mentioned criteria have been satisfied, since the deceased died within seven years of marriage and with the version of the witnesses, it has been further proved that there was cruelty meted out to the deceased immediately before her unfortunate death.18. we, therefore, see no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment passed by the high court or the trial court. the appeal is accordingly dismissed.
1. this matter is placed before us as a bench of this court differed from the view expressed by another bench in mediwell hospital and health care pvt. ltd. v. union of india and ors., manu/sc/1378/1997manu/sc/1378/1997 : 1997(89)elt425(sc) insofar as it imposes a condition to avail of the benefit of the exemption from payment of import duty in accordance with exemption notification no. 64/88 -customs, dated 1st march, 1988 to issue an advertisement on monthly basis in a local newspaper that the total number of indigent patients treated free was at least 40% with full particulars and addresses of each of such indigent patient.2. it is submitted on behalf of the petitioner that conditions for availing exemption had been fulfilled. however, in view of the decision of this court in mediwell's case, the dghs asked the petitioner to further comply with the conditions imposed by this court, as aforesaid. the petitioner contends that fulfilment of such conditions would entail huge expenditure and will unnecessarily add to the burden of the expenses of the hospital in question. a bench of this court felt that this court having laid down guidelines in para 13 of the judgment for the purpose of the competent authority to ensure that the conditions upon which the exemptions were granted were complied with, it would be unnecessary to have further condition imposed requiring the importers to advertise the same; that mere advertisement in a newspaper would not necessarily establish that importers have in fact complied with the condition or that the statement contained in the advertisement was correct; that further verification, in any event would be necessary; that the object is to serve the indigent patients and if such object has been carried out without dispute to the full satisfaction of the respondent authority, it was unnecessary burden upon the petitioner to require a monthly advertisement to be published indicating the details of the indigent patients treated by them as directed in the mediwell's case (supra). it is in those circumstances, disagreeing with the view this matter was referred to a larger bench.3. we have carefully perused the judgment of this court in mediwell's case and also the order of reference. we are of the view that when it was the prerogative of the government to grant exemption, it was for them to impose appropriate conditions for the same. if that is so, this court need not have interposed by reason of an order as made. therefore, we think it appropriate that the directions issued in para 14 of the mediwell's case shall stand overruled. if necessary, the government may issue appropriate conditions for fulfilment of exemption.4. with these observations, this petition stands disposed of.
1. we have heard learned counsel for the parties. the prayer made in this writ petition is as follows:"1. issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or direction, directing the respondents to frame appropriate guidelines for the persons engaged in circuses;2. issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or direction directing the respondents to conduct simultaneous raids in all the circuses by cbi to liberate the children and to check the gross violation of all fundamental rights of the children;3. issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ order or direction to appoint special forces in the borders to ensure action and to check on the cross border trafficking;4. issue a writ of mandamus or any other writ order or direction applying the provisions of the juvenile justice (care and protection of children) act, 2000 and make intra-state trafficking of young children, their bondage and forcible confinements, regular sexual harassments and abuses cognizable offences under the indian penal code as well as under section 31 of the juvenile justice act.5. issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ order or direction to empower child welfare committee under the juvenile justice (care and protection of children) act, 2000 to award compensation to all those victims rescued from the circuses with a time bound rehabilitation package and the state government to create a fund for the same;6. issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ order or direction to lay out a clear set of guidelines prohibiting the employment/engagement of children up to the age of 18 years in any form in the circuses.7. any pass such other order or orders as this hon'ble court may deem fit in the facts and circumstances of the case."2. the relief is essentially with regard to the exploitation of children in circuses in the form of child labour.3. pursuant to our order dated 12.12.2014, a meeting was convened by the secretary, ministry of women and child development which was attended by the secretary, ministry of labour as well as by a large number of officers from various states. the issue with regard to circuses was discussed and considered in that meeting along with other issues including those of human trafficking, child labour and issues pertaining to juvenile justice.4. in our opinion, it is not necessary to mix up the other issues with the issue relating to circuses.5. having gone through the report prepared by the ministry of women and child development, we are of the opinion that it will be appropriate if the following directions are issued to the central government as well as to all the state governments and union territories:(i) there should be a constant monitoring of circuses, both static and mobile, to ensure that child labour is not used in these circuses. the monitoring should also ensure that the children are not exploited in any other manner;(ii) in the event the law enforcement machinery is made aware of any instance of use of employment of child labour or any other violation of law by the circuses, prompt action should be taken to stop the violation of law and take necessary follow-up action;(iii) the central government should monitor the activities of the circuses through the national commission for protection of child rights and the state governments so that our directions are complied with;(iv) needless to say, liberty is granted to the petitioner or any other person to approach the appropriate court of law or the appropriate authority in the event any specific instance of child labour or child abuse is found in any circus, both static or mobile.6. the meeting held on 12th january, 2015 unfortunately indicates that responses were received only from 7-8 states/union territories. we certainly expect the states/union territories to be more vigilant and responsive when issues pertaining to children come up but, as mentioned above, the response has been little unfortunate. however, it is stated by the learned additional solicitor general that the responses are still being received from some states.7. the ministry of women and child development, government of india will analyse all the responses and prepare a detailed report on the issues that were discussed in the aforesaid meeting with specific regard to (i) child trafficking, (ii) juvenile justice issues and (iii) child labour. the analysis should be completed within two months. the analysis should be kept readily available by the ministry of women and child development since it will be of some use in some other cases relating to these issues.8. we direct the director, ministry of home affairs to circulate the compendium of advisories referred to in the meeting held on 12th january, 2015, as requested by the secretary, ministry of labour and employment. the compendium of advisories should be circulated within a week from today. the state governments shall translate these advisories into the local language and make them available for use by the concerned officers and authorities. the translation should be made available within a period of four weeks after receipt of the compendium of advisories from the ministry of home affairs.9. the writ petition is disposed of with the above directions. in view of the orders passed in the writ petition, all pending applications are also disposed of.
jasti chelameswar, j.1. this is an appeal under section 125 of the electricity act, 2003 (hereinafter referred to as "the act") arising out of an order dated 31.10.2014 in i.a. no. 380 of 2014 in dfr no. 2355 of 2014 of the appellate tribunal for electricity, delhi (hereinafter referred to as "the appellate tribunal"), constituted under section 110 of the act.2. by the impugned order, the appellate tribunal declined to condone the delay of 481 days in preferring an appeal against the order dated 02.04.2013 of the central electricity regulatory commission (hereinafter referred to as the "central commission") constituted under section 76 of the act.3. the facts giving rise to this appeal are as follows:the appellant m/s. adani power limited is a subsidiary company of m/s. adani enterprises limited. the appellant has established a power generating station with a total capacity of 4620 mw in the special economic zone at mundra in the state of gujarat. the appellant entered into two power purchase agreements (for short "ppa") dated 02.02.2007 and 06.02.2007 by which the appellant agreed to supply 2x1000 mw power to gujarat urja vikas nigam limited, respondent no. 4 herein. by another ppa dated 07.08.2008, the appellant agreed to supply 1424 mw power to uttar haryana bijli vitran nigam limited and dakshin haryana bijli vitran nigam limited, respondent nos. 2 & 3 herein.4. the appellant filed a petition no. 155/mp/2012 under section 79 of the act before the central commission with prayers as follows:a) to evolve a mechanism to restore the applicant to the same economic condition prior to occurrence of subsequent events mentioned in respective part i & ii hereinabove by adjudicating the disputes between the applicant and the respondent(s) in relation to regulate including changing and/or revising the price/tariff under ppas dated 7.8.2008 with uhbvnl and dhbvnl and 2.2.2007 with guvnl;b) in the alternative, to declare that the applicant is discharged from the performance of the ppas on account of frustration of the ppas due to subsequent events in respective part i & ii;c) this hon'ble central commission be pleased to declare that the revised tariff shall be applicable from the scheduled commercial operation date (scod) of the ppas;d) that during the pendency of the present application hon'ble central commission may direct the respondent(s) to procure power on the cost plus basis, alternatively, the hon'ble central commission may suspend the operation of the ppas till the final disposal of the application;e) pass such further or other orders as the hon'ble central commission may deem just and proper in the circumstances of the case.5. the substance of the petition is that due to various reasons stated by the appellant in its petition, the appellant will not be able to supply power to respondents no. 2 to 4 at the rates agreed between the appellant and those respondents by the abovementioned ppas. therefore, the appellant sought the abovementioned reliefs.6. the appellant submitted before the central commission that he is entitled for the various reliefs on three distinct grounds, they are:1. that the subsequent events qualify as force majeure as per article 12 of the ppas, therefore, the contracts are frustrated;2. that the subsequent events tantamount to change of law as contemplated under article 13 of the ppas, therefore, the appellant is relieved of its obligation to perform the contracts; and3. that the central commission has power to grant appropriate relief to the appellant in exercise of its regulatory powers under section 79 of the act by making necessary modifications in the terms of the ppas.7. by order dated 02.04.2013, the central commission rejected the first two of the abovementioned submissions and accepted the third submission giving certain directions for the constitution of a committee for working out and recommending the compensatory tariff and to submit a report to the commission by 30.04.20131. the order was admittedly received by the appellant on 08.04.2013.8. aggrieved by the said order, respondents no. 2 and 3 herein preferred appeal no. 100 of 2013 before the appellate tribunal alongwith an application to permit them to participate in the proceedings of the above-mentioned committee without prejudice to their contentions in the appeal.9. on 16.09.2013, the committee submitted its report before the central commission. eventually the central commission passed an order dated 21.02.2014 quantifying the compensatory tariff.10. the appeal filed by respondents no. 2 and 3, underwent a number of adjournments and is still pending.11. on 17.04.2014, the appellant herein filed cross-objections in the abovementioned appeal no. 100 of 2013 challenging that part of the order dated 02.04.2013 of the central commission by which the commission declined to accept the pleas of the appellant on the grounds of "force majeure" and "change of law".12. on 22.04.2014, respondents no. 2 and 3 preferred appeal no. 98 of 2014 challenging the correctness of the order dated 21.02.2014 of the central commission. respondent no. 4 also preferred appeal no. 116 of 2014 aggrieved by the order dated 21.02.2014.13. by order dated 01.08.2014, the appellate tribunal dismissed the cross-objections of the appellant herein as not maintainable. on 16.09.2014, the appellant preferred appeal no. dfr no. 2355 of 2014 before the appellate tribunal against that part of the order dated 02.04.2013 which went against the appellant. obviously, there was a delay in preferring that appeal. therefore, the appellant filed an application bearing ia no. 380 of 2014 seeking condonation of delay in preferring the appeal which was rejected by the impugned order. hence, the instant appeal.14. the issue before this court is limited. it is the correctness of the decision of the appellate tribunal in declining to condone the delay in preferring the appeal against order dated 2.4.2013 of the central commission.15. however, elaborate submissions were made regarding the scope of order xli rule 22 of the code of civil procedure, 1908 (for short "code of civil procedure"), its applicability to an appeal under section 111 of the act by the appellant relying upon earlier decisions of this court. respondents submitted that such an enquiry is wholly uncalled for as the cross-objections of the appellant in appeal no. 100 of 2013 stood rejected and became final.16. lastly, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that even if this court comes to the conclusion that the appellant has not made out a case for condonation of delay in preferring an appeal against the order dated 2.4.2013 of the central commission, the appellant is entitled to argue in the pending appeals no. 98 and 116 of 2014 both the grounds of "force majeure" and "change of law" not for the purpose of seeking the relief of a declaration of the frustration of the contracts between the appellants and the respondents thereby relieving the appellant of his obligations arising out of the contracts, but only for the purpose of seeking the alternative relief of compensatory tariff. in other words, the appellant's submission is that the facts which formed the basis of the submission of the 'frustration of contracts' are also relevant for supporting the conclusion of the national commission that the appellant is entitled for the relief of compensatory tariff.17. we agree with the respondents that we are not required to go into the question of the applicability of order xli rule 22 in the instant appeal as the decision of the appellate tribunal to reject the cross-objections of the appellant by its order dated 01.8.2014 has become final and no appeal against the said order is pending before us.18. we are also not required to go into the question whether the order of the central commission dated 02.4.2013 by which it declined to grant a declaration of frustration of the contracts either on the ground of "force majeure" or on the ground of "change of law" is independently appealable, since no such appeal even if maintainable, is preferred by the appellant.19. the question whether the appellant made out a case for condonation of delay in preferring the appeal before the appellate tribunal, in our opinion, need not also be examined by us in view of the last submission made by the appellant. if the appellant is not desirous of seeking a declaration that the appellant is relieved of the obligation to perform the contracts in question, the correctness of the decision of the appellate tribunal in rejecting the application to condone the delay in preferring the appeal would become purely academic. we are of the opinion that so long as the appellant does not seek a declaration, such as the one mentioned above, the appellant is entitled to argue any proposition of law, be it "force majeure" or "change of law" in support of the order dated 21.02.2014 quantifying the compensatory tariff, the correctness of which is under challenge before the appellate tribunal in appeal no. 98 of 2014 and appeal no. 116 of 2014 preferred by the respondents, so long as such an argument is based on the facts which are already pleaded before the central commission.20. the appeal is accordingly disposed of, with no order as to costs.1 para 89. accordingly, we direct the petitioner and the respondents and the respective state governments to constitute a committee within one week from the date of this order. the committee shall consist of the principal secretary (power), govt. of haryana/managing directors of uhbvnl and dhbvnl, the chairman of adani power ltd. or his nominee, an independent financial analyst of repute and an eminent banker of the commensurate level. the nominees of financial analysts and banker should be selected on mutual consent basis. the committee shall go into the impact of the price escalation of the indonesian coal on the project viability and obtain all the actual data required with due authentication from independent auditors to ascertain the cost of import of coal from indonesia and suggest a package for compensatory tariff which can be allowed to the petitioner over and above the tariff in the ppas. the committee shall keep in view inter-alia the following considerations while working out and recommending the compensatory tariff applicable upto a certain period:(a) the net profit less govt. taxes and cess etc. earned by the petitioner's company from the coal mines in indonesia on account of the bench mark price due to indonesian regulation corresponding to the quantity of the coal being supplied to the mundra power project should be factored to pass on the same in full to the beneficiaries in the compensatory tariff.(b) the possibility of sharing the revenue due to sale of power beyond the target availability of mundra power project to the third parties may be explored.(c) the possibility of using coal with a low gcv for generation of electricity for supply to the respondents without affecting the operational efficiency of the generating stations.para 90. the committee is also at liberty to suggest any further measures which would be practicable and commercially sensible to address the situation. the committee shall submit its report to the commission by 30th april 2013 for consideration and for further directions.
vikramajit sen, j.1. a legal nodus of seminal significance and of prosaic procedural origination presents itself before us. the conundrum is whether it is imperative for an unwed mother to specifically notify the putative father of the child whom she has given birth to of her petition for appointment as the guardian of her child. the common perception would be that three competing legal interests would arise, namely, of the mother and the father and the child. we think that it is only the last one which is conclusive, since the parents in actuality have only legal obligations. a child, as has been ubiquitously articulated in different legal forums, is not a chattel or a ball to be shuttled or shunted from one parent to the other. the court exercises paren patrae jurisdiction in custody or guardianship wrangles; it steps in to secure the welfare of the hapless child of two adults whose personal differences and animosity has taken precedence over the future of their child.2. leave granted. this appeal is directed against the judgment dated 8.8.2011 delivered by the high court of delhi, which has dismissed the first appeal of the appellant, who is an unwed mother, holding that her guardianship application cannot be entertained unless she discloses the name and address of the father of her child, thereby enabling the court to issue process to him. as per the appellant's request, her identity and personal details as well as those of her son have not been revealed herein.3. the appellant, who adheres to the christian faith, is well educated, gainfully employed and financially secure. she gave birth to her son in 2010, and has subsequently raised him without any assistance from or involvement of his putative father. desirous of making her son her nominee in all her savings and other insurance policies, she took steps in this direction, but was informed that she must either declare the name of the father or get a guardianship/adoption certificate from the court. she thereupon filed an application under section 7 of the guardians and wards act, 1890 (the act) before the guardian court for declaring her the sole guardian of her son. section 11 of the act requires a notice to be sent to the parents of the child before a guardian is appointed. the appellant has published a notice of the petition in a daily newspaper, namely vir arjun, delhi edition but is strongly averse to naming the father. she has filed an affidavit stating that if at any time in the future the father of her son raises any objections regarding his guardianship, the same may be revoked or altered as the situation may require. however, the guardian court directed her to reveal the name and whereabouts of the father and consequent to her refusal to do so, dismissed her guardianship application on 19.4.2011. the appellant's appeal before the high court was dismissed in limine, on the reasoning that her allegation that she is a single mother could only be decided after notice is issued to the father; that a natural father could have an interest in the welfare and custody of his child even if there is no marriage; and that no case can be decided in the absence of a necessary party.4. ms. indu malhotra, learned senior counsel for the appellant, has vehemently argued before us that the appellant does not want the future of her child to be marred by any controversy regarding his paternity, which would indubitably result should the father refuse to acknowledge the child as his own. this is a brooding reality as the father is already married and any publicity as to a declaration of his fathering a child out of wedlock would have pernicious repercussions to his present family. there would be severe social complications for her and her child. as per section 7 of the act, the interest of the minor is the only relevant factor for appointing of a guardian, and the rights of the mother and father are subservient thereto. in this scenario, the interest of the child would be best served by immediately appointing the appellant as the guardian. furthermore, it is also pressed to the fore that her own fundamental right to privacy will be violated if she is compelled to disclose the name and particulars of the father of her child. ms. malhotra has painstakingly argued this appeal, fully cognizant that the question that arises is of far reaching dimensions. it is this very feature that convinced us of the expediency of appointing amicus curiae, and mr. sidharth luthra has discharged these onerous duties zealously, for which we must immediately record our indebtedness.5. it would be pertinent to succinctly consider the guardians and wards act, 1890. the act, which applies to christians in india, lays down the procedure by which guardians are to be appointed by the jurisdictional court. sections 7, 11 and 19 deserve extraction, for facility of reference.7. power of the court to make order as to guardianship(1) where the court is satisfied that it is for the welfare of a minor that an order should be made-(a) appointing a guardian of his person or property, or both,or(b) declaring a person to be such a guardian,the court may make an order accordingly.(2) an order under this section shall imply the removal of any guardian who has not been appointed by will or other instrument or appointed or declared by the court.(3) where a guardian has been appointed by will or other instrument or appointed or declared by the court, an order under this section appointing or declaring another person to be guardian in his stead shall not be made until the powers of the guardian appointed or declared as aforesaid have ceased under the provisions of this act.the details of the form of application are contained in section 10 and the procedure that applies to a guardianship application is prescribed in section 11.11. procedure on admission of application(1) if the court is satisfied that there is ground for proceeding on the application, it shall fix a day for the hearing thereof, and cause notice of the application and of the date fixed for the hearing-(a) to be served in the manner directed in the code of civil procedure, 1882 (14 of 1882)11 on-(i) the parents of the minor if they are residing in any state to which this act extends;(ii) the person, if any, named in the petition or letter as having the custody or possession of the person or property of the minor;(iii) the person proposed in the application or letter to be appointed or declared guardian, unless that person is himself the applicant; and(iv) any other person to whom, in the opinion of the court special notice of the applicant should be given; and(b) to be posted on some conspicuous part of the court-house and of the residence of the minor, and otherwise published in such manner as the court, subject to any rules made by the high court under this act, thinks fit.(2) the state government may, by general or special order, require that when any part of the property described in a petition under section 10, sub-section (1), is land of which a court of wards could assume the superintendence, the court shall also cause a notice as aforesaid to be served on the collector in whose district the minor ordinarily resides and on every collector in whose district any portion of the land is situate, and the collector may cause the notice to be published in any manner he deems fit.(3) no charge shall be made by the court or the collector for the service or publication of any notice served or published under sub-section (2).section 19 is of significance, even though the infant son does not independently own or possess any property, in that it specifically alludes to the father of a minor. it reads thus:19. guardian not to be appointed by the court in certain casesnothing in this chapter shall authorise the court to appoint or declare a guardian of the property of a minor whose property is under the superintendence of a court of wards or to appoint or declare a guardian of the person-(a) of a minor who is a married female and whose husband is not, in the opinion of court, unfit to be guardian of her person; or(b) of a minor whose father is living and is not in the opinion of the court, unfit to be guardian of the person of the minor; or(c) of a minor whose property is under the superintendence of a court of wards competent to appoint a guardian of the person of the minor.we must immediately underscore the difference in nomenclature, i.e. 'parents' in section 11 and 'father' in section 19, which we think will be perilous to ignore.6. it is contended on behalf of the state that section 11 requires a notice to be given to the 'parents' of a minor before a guardian is appointed; and that as postulated by section 19, a guardian cannot be appointed if the father of the minor is alive and is not, in the opinion of the court, unfit to be the guardian of the child. the impugned judgment is, therefore, in accordance with the act and should be upheld. it seems to us that this interpretation does not impart comprehensive significance to section 7, which is the quintessence of the act. however, before discussing the intendment and interpretation of the act, it would be helpful to appreciate the manner in which the same issue has been dealt with in other statutes and spanning different legal systems across the globe.7. section 6(b) of the hindu minority and guardianship act, 1956 makes specific provisions with respect to natural guardians of illegitimate children, and in this regard gives primacy to the mother over the father. mohammedan law accords the custody of illegitimate children to the mother and her relations. the law follows the principle that the maternity of a child is established in the woman who gives birth to it, irrespective of the lawfulness of her connection with the begetter. however, paternity is inherently nebulous especially where the child is not an offspring of marriage. furthermore, as per section 8 of the indian succession act, 1925, which applies to christians in india, the domicile of origin of an illegitimate child is in the country in which at the time of his birth his mother is domiciled. this indicates that priority, preference and pre-eminence is given to the mother over the father of the concerned child.8. in the united kingdom, the children act 1989 allocates parental responsibility, which includes all rights, duties, powers, responsibilities and authority of a parent over the child and his/her property. according to section 2(2) of that act, parental custody of a child born of unwed parents is with the mother in all cases, and additionally with the father provided he has acquired responsibility in accordance with the provisions of the act. to acquire responsibility, he would have to register as the child's father, execute a parental responsibility agreement with the mother or obtain a court order giving him parental responsibility over the child. in the u.s.a., each state has different child custody laws but predominantly the mother has full legal and physical custody from the time the child is born. unless an unmarried father establishes his paternity over the child it is generally difficult for him to defeat or overwhelm the preferential claims of the mother to the custody. however, some states assume that both parents who sign the child's birth certificate have joint custody, regardless of whether they are married. in ireland, section 6(4) of the guardianship of infants act, 1964 ordains-"the mother of an illegitimate infant shall be guardian of the infant." unless the mother agrees to sign a statutory declaration, an unmarried father must apply to the court in order to become a legal guardian of his child. article 176 of the family code of the philippines explicitly provides that "illegitimate children shall use the surname and shall be under the parental authority of their mother, and shall be entitled to support in conformity with this code." this position obtains regardless of whether the father admits paternity. in 2004, the supreme court of the philippines in joey d. briones v. maricel p. miguel et al, g.r. no. 156343, held that an illegitimate child is under the sole parental authority of the mother. the law in new zealand, as laid out in section 17 of the care of children act, 2004, is that the mother of a child is the sole guardian if she is not married to, or in civil union with, or living as a de facto partner with the father of the child at any time during the period beginning with the conception of the child and ending with the birth of the child. in south africa, according to the children's act no. 38 of 2005, parental responsibility includes the responsibility and the right (a) to care for the child; (b) to maintain contact with the child; (c) to act as guardian of the child; and (d) to contribute to the maintenance of the child. the biological mother of a child, whether married or unmarried, has full parental responsibilities and rights in respect of the child. the father has full parental responsibility if he is married to the mother, or if he was married to her at the time of the child's conception, or at the time of the child's birth or any time in between, or if at the time of the child's birth he was living with the mother in a permanent life-partnership, or if he (i) consents to be identified or successfully applies in terms of section 26 to be identified as the child's father or pays damages in terms of customary law; (ii) contributes or has attempted in good faith to contribute to the child's upbringing for a reasonable period; and (iii) contributes or has attempted in good faith to contribute towards expenses in connection with the maintenance of the child for a reasonable period. this conspectus indicates that the preponderant position that it is the unwed mother who possesses primary custodial and guardianship rights with regard to her children and that the father is not conferred with an equal position merely by virtue of his having fathered the child. this analysis should assist us in a meaningful, dynamic and enduring interpretation of the law as it exists in india.9. it is thus abundantly clear that the predominant legal thought in different civil and common law jurisdictions spanning the globe as well as in different statutes within india is to bestow guardianship and related rights to the mother of a child born outside of wedlock. avowedly, the mother is best suited to care for her offspring, so aptly and comprehensively conveyed in hindi by the word 'mamta'. furthermore, recognizing her maternity would obviate the necessity of determining paternity. in situations such this, where the father has not exhibited any concern for his offspring, giving him legal recognition would be an exercise in futility. in today's society, where women are increasingly choosing to raise their children alone, we see no purpose in imposing an unwilling and unconcerned father on an otherwise viable family nucleus. it seems to us that a man who has chosen to forsake his duties and responsibilities is not a necessary constituent for the wellbeing of the child. the appellant has taken care to clarify that should her son's father evince any interest in his son, she would not object to his participation in the litigation, or in the event of its culmination, for the custody issue to be revisited. although the guardian court needs no such concession, the mother's intent in insisting that the father should not be publically notified seems to us not to be unreasonable.10. we feel it necessary to add that the purpose of our analysis of the law in other countries was to arrive at a holistic understanding of what a variety of jurisdictions felt would be in the best interest of the child. it was not, as learned counsel suggested, to understand the tenets of christian law. india is a secular nation and it is a cardinal necessity that religion be distanced from law. therefore, the task before us is to interpret the law of the land, not in light of the tenets of the parties' religion but in keeping with legislative intent and prevailing case law.11. it is imperative that the rights of the mother must also be given due consideration. as ms. malhotra, learned senior counsel for the appellant, has eloquently argued, the appellant's fundamental right of privacy would be violated if she is forced to disclose the name and particulars of the father of her child. any responsible man would keep track of his offspring and be concerned for the welfare of the child he has brought into the world; this does not appear to be so in the present case, on a perusal of the pleading as they presently portray. furthermore, christian unwed mothers in india are disadvantaged when compared to their hindu counterparts, who are the natural guardians of their illegitimate children by virtue of their maternity alone, without the requirement of any notice to the putative fathers. it would be apposite for us to underscore that our directive principles envision the existence of a uniform civil code, but this remains an unaddressed constitutional expectation.12. we recognize that the father's right to be involved in his child's life may be taken away if section 11 is read in such a manner that he is not given notice, but given his lack of involvement in the child's life, we find no reason to prioritize his rights over those of the mother or her child. additionally, given that the appellant has already issued notice to the public in general by way of a publication in a national daily and has submitted an affidavit stating that her guardianship rights may be revoked, altered or amended if at any point the father of the child objects to them, the rights, nay duty of the father have been more than adequately protected.13. the issue at hand is the interpretation of section 11 of the act. as the intention of the act is to protect the welfare of the child, the applicability of section 11 would have to be read accordingly. in laxmi kant pandey v. union of india manu/sc/0080/1985manu/sc/0080/1985 : 1985 (supp) scc 701, this court prohibited notice of guardianship applications from being issued to the biological parents of a child in order to prevent them from tracing the adoptive parents and the child. although the guardians and wards act was not directly attracted in that case, nevertheless it is important as it reiterates that the welfare of the child takes priority above all else, including the rights of the parents. in the present case we do not find any indication that the welfare of the child would be undermined if the appellant is not compelled to disclose the identity of the father, or that court notice is mandatory in the child's interest. on the contrary, we find that this may well protect the child from social stigma and needless controversy.14. even in the absence of laxmi kant pandey, we are not like mariners in unchartered troubled seas. the observations of a three judge bench of this court in githa hariharan v. reserve bank of india manu/sc/0117/1999manu/sc/0117/1999 : (1999) 2 scc 228 are readily recollected. the rbi had refused to accept an application for a fixed deposit in the name of the child signed solely by the mother. in the context of section 6 of the hindu minority and guardianship act as well as section 19 of the guardians and wards act, this court had clarified that "in all situations where the father is not in actual charge of the affairs of the minor either because of his indifference or because of an agreement between him and the mother of the minor (oral or written) and the minor is in the exclusive care and custody of the mother or the father for any other reason is unable to take care of the minor because of his physical and/or mental incapacity, the mother can act as natural guardian of the minor and all her actions would be valid even during the life time of the father who would be deemed to be "absent" for the purposes of section 6(a) of the hmg act and section 19(b) of the gw act." this court has construed the word 'after' in section 6(a) of the hindu minority and guardianship act as meaning "in the absence of-be it temporary or otherwise or total apathy of the father towards the child or even inability of the father by reason of ailment or otherwise." thus this court interpreted the legislation before it in a manner conducive to granting the mother, who was the only involved parent, guardianship rights over the child.15. in a case where one of the parents petitions the court for appointment as guardian of her child, we think that the provisions of section 11 would not be directly applicable. it seems to us that section 11 applies to a situation where the guardianship of a child is sought by a third party, thereby making it essential for the welfare of the child being given in adoption to garner the views of child's natural parents. the views of an uninvolved father are not essential, in our opinion, to protect the interests of a child born out of wedlock and being raised solely by his/her mother. we may reiterate that even in the face of the express terms of the statute, this court had in laxmi kant pandey directed that notice should not be sent to the parents, as that was likely to jeopardize the future and interest of the child who was being adopted. the sole factor for consideration before us, therefore, is the welfare of the minor child, regardless of the rights of the parents. we should not be misunderstood as having given our imprimatur to an attempt by one of the spouses to unilaterally seek custody of a child from the marriage behind the back of other spouse. the apprehensions of mr. luthra, learned amicus curiae, are accordingly addressed.16. section 11 is purely procedural; we see no harm or mischief in relaxing its requirements to attain the intendment of the act. given that the term "parent" is not defined in the act, we interpret it, in the case of illegitimate children whose sole caregiver is one of his/her parents, to principally mean that parent alone. guardianship or custody orders never attain permanence or finality and can be questioned at any time, by any person genuinely concerned for the minor child, if the child's welfare is in peril. the uninvolved parent is therefore not precluded from approaching the guardian court to quash, vary or modify its orders if the best interests of the child so indicate. there is thus no mandatory and inflexible procedural requirement of notice to be served to the putative father in connection with a guardianship or custody petition preferred by the natural mother of the child of whom she is the sole caregiver.17. implicit in the notion and width of welfare of the child, as one of its primary concomitants, is the right of the child to know the identity of his or her parents. this right has now found unquestionable recognition in the convention on the rights of the child, which india has acceded to on 11th november, 1992. this convention pointedly makes mention, inter alia, to the universal declaration of human rights. for facility of reference the salient provisions are reproduced-article 1for the purposes of the present convention, a child means every human being below the age of eighteen years unless under the law applicable to the child, majority is attained earlier.article 31. in all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.2. states parties undertake to ensure the child such protection and care as is necessary for his or her well-being, taking into account the rights and duties of his or her parents, legal guardians, or other individuals legally responsible for him or her, and, to this end, shall take all appropriate legislative and administrative measures.3. states parties shall ensure that the institutions, services and facilities responsible for the care or protection of children shall conform with the standards established by competent authorities, particularly in the areas of safety, health, in the number and suitability of their staff, as well as competent supervision.article 71. the child shall be registered immediately after birth and shall have the right from birth to a name, the right to acquire a nationality and, as far as possible, the right to know and be cared for by his or her parents.article 91. states parties shall ensure that a child shall not be separated from his or her parents against their will, except when competent authorities subject to judicial review determine, in accordance with applicable law and procedures, that such separation is necessary for the best interests of the child. such determination may be necessary in a particular case such as one involving abuse or neglect of the child by the parents, or one where the parents are living separately and a decision must be made as to the child's place of residence.2. in any proceedings pursuant to paragraph 1 of the present article, all interested parties shall be given an opportunity to participate in the proceedings and make their views known.3. states parties shall respect the right of the child who is separated from one or both parents to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, except if it is contrary to the child's best interests.article 121. states parties shall assure to the child who is capable of forming his or her own views the right to express those views freely in all matters affecting the child, the views of the child being given due weight in accordance with the age and maturity of the child.2. for this purpose, the child shall in particular be provided the opportunity to be heard in any judicial and administrative proceedings affecting the child, either directly, or through a representative or an appropriate body, in a manner consistent with the procedural rules of national law.article 181. states parties shall use their best efforts to ensure recognition of the principle that both parents have common responsibilities for the upbringing and development of the child. parents or, as the case may be, legal guardians, have the primary responsibility for the upbringing and development of the child. the best interests of the child will be their basic concern.article 21states parties that recognize and/or permit the system of adoption shall ensure that the best interests of the child shall be the paramount consideration and they shall:(a) ensure that the adoption of a child is authorized only by competent authorities who determine, in accordance with applicable law and procedures and on the basis of all pertinent and reliable information, that the adoption is permissible in view of the child's status concerning parents, relatives and legal guardians and that, if required, the persons concerned have given their informed consent to the adoption on the basis of such counselling as may be necessary;article 272. the parent(s) or others responsible for the child have the primary responsibility to secure, within their abilities and financial capacities, the conditions of living necessary for the child's development.4. states parties shall take all appropriate measures to secure the recovery of maintenance for the child from the parents or other persons having financial responsibility for the child, both within the state party and from abroad. in particular, where the person having financial responsibility for the child lives in a state different from that of the child, states parties shall promote the accession to international agreements or the conclusion of such agreements, as well as the making of other appropriate arrangements.18. in laxmi kant pandey, this court duly noted the provisions of the convention on the rights of the child, but in the general context of adoption of children and, in particular, regarding the necessity to involve the natural parents in the consequent guardianship/custody proceedings. the provisions of the convention which we have extracted indeed reiterate the settled legal position that the welfare of the child is of paramount consideration vis--vis the perceived rights of parents not only so far as the law in india is concerned, but preponderantly in all jurisdictions across the globe. we are mindful of the fact that we are presently not confronted with a custody conflict and, therefore, there is no reason whatsoever to even contemplate the competence or otherwise of the appellant as custodian of the interests and welfare of her child. however, we would be loathe to lose perspective of our parens patriae obligations, and in that regard we need to ensure that the child's right to know the identity of his parents is not vitiated, undermined, compromised or jeopardised. in order to secure and safeguard this right, we have interviewed the appellant and impressed upon her the need to disclose the name of the father to her son. she has disclosed his name, along with some particulars to us; she states that she has no further information about him. these particulars have been placed in an envelope and duly sealed, and may be read only pursuant to a specific direction of this court.19. we are greatly perturbed by the fact that the appellant has not obtained a birth certificate for her son who is nearly five years old. this is bound to create problems for the child in the future. in this regard, the appellant has not sought any relief either before us or before any of the courts below. it is a misplaced assumption in the law as it is presently perceived that the issuance of a birth certificate would be a logical corollary to the appellant succeeding in her guardianship petition. it may be recalled that owing to curial fiat, it is no longer necessary to state the name of the father in applications seeking admission of children to school, as well as for obtaining a passport for a minor child. however, in both these cases, it may still remain necessary to furnish a birth certificate. the law is dynamic and is expected to diligently keep pace with time and the legal conundrums and enigmas it presents. there is no gainsaying that the identity of the mother is never in doubt. accordingly, we direct that if a single parent/unwed mother applies for the issuance of a birth certificate for a child born from her womb, the authorities concerned may only require her to furnish an affidavit to this effect, and must thereupon issue the birth certificate, unless there is a court direction to the contrary. trite though it is, yet we emphasise that it is the responsibility of the state to ensure that no citizen suffers any inconvenience or disadvantage merely because the parents fail or neglect to register the birth. nay, it is the duty of the state to take requisite steps for recording every birth of every citizen. to remove any possible doubt, the direction pertaining to issuance of the birth certificate is intendedly not restricted to the circumstances or the parties before us.20. we think it necessary to also underscore the fact that the guardian court as well as the high court which was in seisin of the appeal ought not to have lost sight of the fact that they had been called upon to discharge their parens patriae jurisdiction. upon a guardianship petition being laid before the court, the concerned child ceases to be in the exclusive custody of the parents; thereafter, until the attainment of majority, the child continues in curial curatorship. having received knowledge of a situation that vitally affected the future and welfare of a child, the courts below could be seen as having been derelict in their duty in merely dismissing the petition without considering all the problems, complexities and complications concerning the child brought within its portals.21. the appeal is therefore allowed. the guardian court is directed to recall the dismissal order passed by it and thereafter consider the appellant's application for guardianship expeditiously without requiring notice to be given to the putative father of the child.
a.m. khanwilkar, j.1. delay condoned.2. this appeal arises from the final judgment and order passed by the national green tribunal (western zone) bench, pune dated 29th may, 2015 in application no. 51/2014 and dated 14th december, 2015 in m.a. no. 180/2015 (wz) and review application no. 15/2015(wz).3. respondent nos. 1-4 had filed an application before the tribunal under section 14(1) read with section 14(3) of the national green tribunal act, 2010 complaining about degradation of environment on account of unauthorized construction on plot of land falling within crz(iii)(no development zone-in short ndz).4. according to the said respondents (original applicants), the appellant (original respondent no. 3) was responsible for construction of a commercial building on plot of land bearing chalta no. 1/pts no. 10, panjim city and survey no. 65/1-a village morombio grande in merces panchayat, without obtaining necessary permission from the concerned authorities. that construction is detrimental to the coastal ecosystem and river ecosystem; and is also likely to cause pollution of river water due to the commercial activities of the bar and restaurant. it was alleged that the appellant exerted political influence to facilitate construction of the unauthorized structure on the said plot.5. the appellant opposed the said application by raising preliminary objections. firstly, that the subject application was not maintainable-as remedy of appeal under section 16 against the decision of the authority could be preferred. secondly, the applicants had failed to comply with the procedure prescribed under rule 13 of the national green tribunal (practices and procedure) rules, 2011. thirdly, the application was barred by limitation-as the cause of action had arisen soon after the construction work was commenced in the year 2011. the application, however, was not filed within 6 months therefrom. further, a writ petition for similar challenge was filed before the high court and has since been withdrawn. no liberty has been given by the high court to the applicants to pursue the same cause of action. on merits, it was asserted that the structure was in existence prior to 19th february, 1991 when the crz policy came into force. it was used as a garage at the relevant time. the appellant after purchasing the plot and the structure standing thereon vide registered sale deed dated 3rd august, 1992, initially used it for motor garage and allied activity. the same structure after repair and renovation was used as restaurant and bar. in substance, the stand of the appellant was that since the structure was in existence prior to 19th february, 1991, the change of user after taking permission of the concerned authorities would not make the same unauthorized. the appellant had taken due permission of the competent authority for re-roofing and re-flooring of the structure. it was not a case of construction of a new structure within the no development zone (ndz) as is contended.6. the tribunal after analyzing the documentary evidence including the survey reports brought on record by the parties, negatived the plea of the appellant that the structure as it exists at present was constructed prior to 19th february, 1991. the tribunal recorded that finding on the basis of the contents of the registered sale deed dated 3rd august, 1992 executed in favour of the appellant by the original owner of the plot, the house property revenue records, settlement of land records, no objection certificate given by the panchayat, inspection report dated 2nd may, 2012, and also the contents of the affidavit filed by the appellants. the tribunal held that the structure as existed prior to 19th february, 1991, on plot of land bearing survey no. 65/1-a or in survey no. 83/2-a of village morombio grande in merces panchayat, falling within 100 metres distance (in crz iii area), was a small structure at the corner of the said plot and was used as a garage. the tribunal then relied on the decision of the high court of bombay in the case of goa foundation v. the panchayat of condolim & the panchayat of calangute1, in which directions were issued to the state authorities to take action against such unauthorized structures and constructions put up on the land falling within crz-iii area in goa, village or town-wise after 19th february, 1991; and further that permission can be granted "only" for repair and renovation of the existing "dwelling units" in such areas. the tribunal following that decision observed that the structure other than the original structure as existed on 19th february, 1991, standing on land survey no. 65/1-a or in survey no. 83/2-a of village morombio grande in merces panchayat at south goa be demolished forthwith after following due process. the directions given by the tribunal read thus:a. all the structures, including restaurant and bar/pub and allied structures standing in the land survey no. 65/1-a, or in survey no. 83/2-a, of village morombio grande, shall be demolished by deputy collector, south goa, within the period of six(6 weeks)b. we direct respondent no. 3 anil to pay amount of rs. 20(twenty) lacs as costs of degradation of environment and violation of crz notification, 1991, within six(6) weeks to the environment department, govt. of goa along with costs of rs. 5000/- (five thousand) as litigation costs, which be equally disbursed in favour of all the applicants.c. the gczma, is directed to hold enquiry regarding houses illegal structures of crz area about which permission might have been obtained without following due procedures and to take appropriate action against the violators of crz notifications.d. the compliances about demolition of illegal structures of respondent no. 3 and costs payment of costs, shall be reported to the tribunal within(6) weeks.e. the application is accordingly disposed of.the appellant thereafter filed review petition before the tribunal which, however, was dismissed on december 14, 2015, thus reiterating the direction already issued by the tribunal.7. aggrieved, the appellant has filed the present appeal challenging both the judgments on the original application and the review application. according to the appellant the finding of fact recorded by the tribunal with regard to the status of the structure standing on the subject plot is manifestly wrong. it was then contended that even the finding of the tribunal that permission can be granted only for repair or renovation of dwelling units, was contrary to the crz policy document. further, the crz policy document does not restrict the user of the existing structure or disallow the change of user therein. further, the appellant having taken due permission of the competent authority to use the structure as restaurant and bar must prevail. in the alternative it is submitted that the appellant was entitled to repair and renovate the original structure as it existed on 19th february, 1991 and use it for the purpose/activity permissible after taking approval of the competent authority in that behalf. the learned counsel for respondent no. 5 invited our attention to the relevant documents, in particular to the show cause notice issued by goa coastal zone municipal authority (gczma) dated 25th may, 2012 and the report of the enquiry committee (gczma) dated 30th february, 2014 which concluded that there was no violation of crz regulation.8. the appellant has not seriously pursued the preliminary objections which were otherwise raised in the reply to the application filed before the tribunal and rejected by the tribunal. the principal argument of the appellant is that the factual finding recorded by the tribunal about the status of the structure on the subject plot is manifestly wrong. in the first place, merely because remedy of appeal is provided against the decision of the tribunal before this court that does not mean that this court must reappreciate the entire evidence on record and specially when the same has already been analysed by the tribunal, unless the appellant is able to demonstrate that the finding recorded by the tribunal suffers from error apparent on the face of the record or is perverse. nevertheless, we permitted the appellant to refer to the relevant contemporaneous record which has already been extensively analysed by the tribunal. on going through the said documents, we are not in a position to take a view different than the view already taken by the tribunal. we find that when the appellant purchased the subject plot vide registered sale deed dated 3rd august, 1992, only a small structure at the corner of the said plot was in existence and was used as a garage and which was indisputably within 100 metres from the high tide line. on this finding, it necessarily follows, that the structure as it exists now is quite different-both in shape, size and location being in the middle of the plot. obviously, it is an unauthorized structure constructed after 19th february, 1991. the crz policy dated 19.02.1991 prohibits any construction upto 200 metres from the high tide line. it is to be treated as 'no development zone', except for repairs of existing "authorized structures" not exceeding specific permissible fsi, plinth area and other norms for permissible activities including facilities essential for such activity under the notification. the relevant clause in the said notification, dealing with land area falling within crz-iii area reads thus:......................crz-iiii. the area upto 200 metres from the high tide line is to be earmarked as 'no development zone. no construction shall be permitted within this zone except for repairs of existing authorized structures not exceeding existing fsi, existing plinth area and existing density, and for permissible activities under the notification including facilities essential for such activities. an authority designated by the state government/union territory administration may permit construction of facilities for water supply, drainage and sewerage for requirements of local inhabitants. however, the following used may be permissible in this zone agriculture, horticulture, gardens, pastures, parks, play fields, forestry and salt manufacture from sea water.ii. development of vacant plots between 200 and 500 metres of high tide line in designated areas of crz-iii with prior approval of ministry of environment and forests (mef) permitted for construction of hotels/beach resorts for temporary occupation of tourists/visitors subject to the conditions as stipulated in guidelines at annexure-ii.iii. construction/reconstruction of dwelling units between 200 and 500 metres of the high tide line permitted so long it is within the ambit of traditional rights and customary uses such as existing fishing villages and gaothans. building permission for such construction/reconstruction will be subject to the conditions that the total number of dwelling units shall not be more than twice the number of existing units; total covered area on all floors shall not exceed 33 percent of the plot size; the overall height of construction shall not exceed 9 metres and construction shall not be more than 2 floors ground floor plus one floor. construction is allowed for permissible activities under the notification including facilities essential for such activities. an authority designated by state government/union territory administration may permit construction of public rain shelters, community toilets, water supply, drainage, sewerage, roads and bridges. the said authority may also permit construction of schools and dispensaries, for local inhabitants of the area, for those panchayats the major part of which falls within crz if no other area is available for construction of such facilities.iv. reconstruction/alterations of an existing authorized building permitted subject to (i) to (iii) above......................................................(emphasis supplied)9. relying on sub-clauses (i), (iii) and (iv), it was contended that the tribunal committed error in law on two counts. firstly, in assuming that the structure within crz area can be used only as a dwelling unit, and secondly, that repairs and renovation permission can be given only to such dwelling units. this submission does not commend us. sub-clause (i) plainly mandates that "no construction" of any kind be permitted within 200 metres from the high tide line. that area has to be treated as "no development zone", except for repairs of "existing authorized structures" (on the date of the notification i.e. 19th february, 1991) and not exceeding the permissible fsi, plinth area and density and for permissible activities. sub-clause (iii) deals with crz area between 200 to 500 metres of high tide line with which we are not concerned in the present case. in as much as, the finding of fact by the tribunal about the location of the plot is that the plot was within 100 metres from the high tide line. there is nothing to doubt the correctness of this finding.10. the moot question then is: whether the structure as it existed when the respondents moved the tribunal complaining about violation within the crz area was the same structure as on 19th february, 1991 when the crz policy came into being. that finding of fact has been answered against the appellant by the tribunal and we must agree with the same. for, the structure as it existed when the plot was purchased by the appellant on 3rd august, 1992 was a small structure at the corner of the subject plot and was used only as a garage or for repairs of vehicles and allied activity. the structure in respect of which complaint has been made before the tribunal was completely different in shape, size and also location for which reason the tribunal issued direction to remove the same. the view taken by the tribunal relying on the decision of the bombay high court, which the tribunal was bound to follow, permitted retention of only dwelling units within crz iii area and constructed prior to 19th february, 1991. the direction given by the high court in the case of goa foundation (supra) have been reproduced by the tribunal in para 12 of the impugned judgment, which reads thus:12. the hon'ble high court summarized findings and gave directions in paragraph 32 as follows:(a) to conduct survey and enquiry as regards the number of dwelling units and all other structures and constructions which were existing in the crz-iii zone in goa, village or town wise as on 19th february, 1991 and increase the number thereof thereafter, date-wise.(b) to identify on the basis of permission granted for construction of the dwelling units which are in excess of double the units with regard to those which were existing 19th february, 1991.(c) to identify all types of structures and constructions made in crz-iii zone, except the dwelling units, after 19th february 1991 in the locality comprised of the dwelling units and to take action against the same for the demolition in accordance with the provisions of law.(d) to identify the open plots in crz-iii zone which are available for construction of hotels and to frame appropriate policy/regulation for utilization thereof they are being allowed to be utilized for such construction activities.(e) till the survey and enquiry is completed, as directed above, no new licence for any type of construction in crz-iii zone, except repairs and renovation of the existing houses which shall be subject to the appropriate order on completion and result of the survey and enquiry to be held as directed above and this should be specifically stated in the licences to be granted for the purpose of repairs and/or renovation of the existing houses.(f) the respondent no. 5 to conduct an enquiry and fix responsibility for the violation of crz notification in relation to clause-iii of crz-iii zone and to take appropriate action against the persons responsible for such violation of the provisions of the environmental protection act and the said notification in relation to the crz-iii zone.(g) all this directions stated above are in relation to the crz-iii zone in goa in terms of the said notification.(h) the survey and enquiry should be conducted as expeditiously as possible and should be concluded preferably within the period of six months, and in any case, by 30th may, 2007, and report in that regard should be placed before this court in the first week after the summer vacation of 2007, for necessary for the order.(i) meanwhile, on conclusion of the survey and inquiry, necessary action should proceed against the offending structures and report in that regard also should be placed along with the above effort report.(j) the respondent no. 3 and 4 shall ensure prompt compliance of the directions given in this judgment and shall be responsible for submitting the report required to be submitted as stated above.(k) all the records relating to the survey and the inquiry should be made available to the public available to the public and in that regard a website should be opened and the entire material should be displaced on the website. the respondent no. 3 should ensure due compliance of this direction by 10th of june, 2007.(l) the respondent no. 1 and 3 shall pay costs of rs. 10,000/- in each of the petitions to the petitioners.(m) report to be received from the respondents should be placed before this court in the third week of june, 2007.(n) rule is made absolute in above terms.so long as these directions are in force, the state authorities or municipal authorities were bound by the same and they could not have granted permission to any applicant in breach thereof. any permission given contrary to those directions must be viewed as nullity and non-est, having been given in complete disregard of the directions of the high court. thus, the permission granted to the appellant by gczma would be of no avail, as it is not consistent with the directions of the high court.11. the fact remains that the structure directed to be demolished by the tribunal, was obviously erected after 19th february, 1991. that being an unauthorized structure within the meaning of sub-clause (i) quoted above, could not be used for any purpose whatsoever and was required to be demolished. therefore, the finding recorded by the tribunal and the consequential directions given in that behalf are unassailable.12. in this view of the matter, it is not necessary for us to dilate on the argument as to whether the crz policy prohibits change of user of the structure which was in existence on 19th february, 1991, so as to be used as a restaurant and bar. in our opinion, on the facts of the present case, no substantial question of law much less of great public importance arises for our consideration.13. hence this appeal must fail and the same is, therefore, dismissed with no order as to cost.1 w.p. no. 422/1998 & w.p. no. 99/1999
a.k. sikri, j.1. the issue, which arises for consideration in the present appeals is whether the central excise and service tax appellate tribunal (for short, 'cestat'), bangalore erred in disallowing the benefit of the notification no. 8/96 : manu/exct/0010/1996 dated 23.07.1996 and notification no. 4/97 dated 01.03.97 respectively to the appellant.2. the appellant herein is engaged in the manufacture of excisable goods falling under chapter 85 and 90. from january 1997 onwards the appellant had been manufacturing and clearing two models of d.c. defibrillators which are known as model no. df2389r with recorder and model 2389 without recorder. the appellant had filed classification declaration from time to time and classified the items under c.e.t. heading 9018 and claimed exemption under notification no. 8/96 dated 23.09.1996 and notification no. 4/97 dated 01.03.97 respectively. the revenue, however, took a view that the said defibrillators were not eligible to the benefit of the aforesaid exemption notifications. therefore, by letter dated 17.02.98 it directed the appellant to modify its classifications declaration as only miniaturized implantable defibrillators were eligible to the benefit of the notification. the appellant protested by giving reply and maintaining that the notification in question encompassed the aforesaid goods manufactured by the appellant as well. the department was not amused by the reply given by the appellant. it resulted in issuance of show-cause notice dated 23.09.1998 whereunder demand duty with respect to defibrillators manufactured during the period january 1997 to march 1998 was proposed as duty in the said show-cause notice.3. we may point out at this stage that a defibrillator is a device that delivers electrical shock through paddles placed either directly across the heart or on the surface of the body during cardiac emergency resulting from ventricular fibrillation. the meaning of cardiac defibrillator is explained in medicine and clinical engineering physiological and clinical medicine by bertil jacobson karolinska institute, stockholm, sweden, jhon g. webster, university of wisconsin, medison. it reads as follows:some cardiac arrhythmias can be treated by passing a brief electric shock through heart. ventricular fibrillation can often be stopped before circulatory arrest has caused irreversible brain damage due to oxygen deficiency. likewise, atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter can often be stopped by defibrillator.4. ventricular fibrillation may be caused by an external electric shock, which occurs near the peak of the t wave-the vulnerable period when the ventricle is re polarizing. it may also be caused when a pvc occurs during this same vulnerable period; in this case the heart electrocutes itself. fibrillation has been likened to a dog chasing its tail, with continuous travel of the waves of depolarization and repolarization. during defibrillator, a large electric shock causes simultaneous depolarization of all cardiac muscle fibres. when they recover, normal packing resumes. an energy 50-500 ws (joules) has been found most effective, with the current passing through the heart along the longitudinal axis. defibrillator can be performed externally via two electrodes placed on the chest or internally on the exposed heart during an operation. with an electrode about 50 cm in area, the resistance through the thorax is about 100 ft. for internal defibrillator on an exposed heart the resistance is lower, about 50 ft.5. as per the department, defibrillators manufactured by the appellant were designed to provide external counter shock and the apparatus for which nil rate of duty had been prescribed was for defibrillators meant for internal use only and not for conventional defibrillators manufactured and cleared by the appellant. the department had also invoked the longer period of limitation under section 11a of the excise act by alleging suppression. the appellant filed their reply to the show-cause notice contending mainly that the defibrillators were meant both for internal and external use and that the allegation of suppression of fact was totally incorrect and therefore the demand was time barred. the appellant attended personal hearing and thereafter the commissioner by order dated 19.11.1999 confirmed the demand of rs. 27,71,326/- and imposed equivalent penalty under section 11ac as well as further penalty of rs. 1 lakh.6. thereafter, the appellant filed an appeal before the cegat, madras (now chennai) against the order of the commissioner mainly impressing upon the cegat that the commissioner in the impugned order had relied upon extraneous grounds to come to the conclusion that the defibrillators manufactured by the appellant were only for external use and, therefore, the benefit of notification could not be extended. the appellant produced evidence in the form of certificates from the department of electronics, hospitals, invoices for clearance of the equipment with internal paddles and other technical literature to substantiate their contention that defibrillators manufactured by them were put to internal use by using internal paddles on the exposed hear during cardiac surgery. they relied upon decisions that the term 'for use' means capable of being used and not actual use and also on interpretation of statute. the cegat, by its order dated 01.03.2002, held that the commissioner had come to a finding on an incomplete reading of the manual and had not considered well-settled law on 'for use'. the cegat, therefore, remanded the matter back to the commissioner to decide eligibility for exemption under above notifications. it further directed that during the re-adjudication both the sides were free to lead such evidence as were available to be put before the adjudicating authority. they left open the question of limitation, penalty and interest.7. on remand, the appellant filed a further reply before the commissioner and relied upon various documents in support of its contention that its defibrillator was capable of internal use and the said defibrillator and implantable defibrillators were two different pieces of equipment. the appellant again contended that the demand was time barred, as there was no suppression of facts. the appellant appeared for personal hearing and reiterated its submissions and filed additional written submissions. it produced photographs showing the defibrillator being put to internal use during open heart surgery as well as the technical literature to substantiate its claim.8. the commissioner, however, by order dated 22.02.2003 upheld the earlier order of the commissioner and once again denied the benefit of the notification to this product of the appellant. according to the commissioner the benefit of the exemption notification was available only to implantable defibrillators coupled with pace makers.9. the appellant once again filed the appeal before the cestat, bangalore. after hearing, an order dated 31.12.2003 was passed, wherein there was a difference of opinion between the judicial and technical member. as per the order of the judicial member, the defibrillator manufactured by the appellant could be used for internal use and therefore they are eligible to the benefit of the notification. since his opinion was in favour of the appellants on merits, he did not go into the time bar issue. the technical member while admitting that the defibrillator could be used for internal use in "rare circumstances" when the heart is open and the paddles for internal use are fixed in the defibrillators as there is a build in mechanism in the defibrillator for making it usable as internal defibrillator during an open heart surgery, however denied the benefit of the notification on the ground that only defibrillators used with pace maker and which is implantable is eligible to the benefit of the notification.10. as there was a difference of opinion, the issue was referred to a third member. the third member, viz. the president of the tribunal, heard the matter and passed the order dated 19.05.2004 disallowing the benefit of the notification to the defibrillator thereby concurring with the view of the technical member.11. this is how the matter has come up to this court in the form of present appeal filed by the appellant under section 35l(b) of the central excise act (herein after refer to as act), challenging the aforesaid order dated 19.05.2004.12. we have already taken note of the product in question with its salient features and particular uses it can be put to. question is as to whether it satisfies the requirement of notification no. 8/96 : manu/exct/0010/1996 and notification no. 4/97, under which the appellant is claiming exemption. thus, before we proceed further it would be apt to scan through the ingredients of the aforesaid notifications along with earlier notifications under which exemption is granted in respect of defibrillator, from time to time. first notification in this behalf is the notification no. 339/86 dated 11.06.1986, which was amended by notifications dated 01.03.1989 and 01.03.1994. material part of these notifications read as under:notification no. 339/86-ce dated 11.06.86 amended by notification nos. 88/89-ce dated 01.03.89 and 58/94-ce dated 01.03.94.8 dc defibrillators now internal use and pacemakers and their accessories including patient cable, internal defibrillators paddles 45mm and 55mm sizes but excluding:(a) cardiac monitors(b) cardioscopes(c) e.c.g. monitors of any type.(d) e.c.g. recorderand the following components of d.c. defibrillators, namely:(i) connector.(ii) discharge/damp relay(iii) high voltage retractable, flexible wire(iv) polyester/paper discharge capacitor20. implantable cardiac pacemaker and accessories.30. pacemaker wires.31. patient cable for pacemaker.13. we now reproduce the relevant portion of the two notification nos. 8/96 : manu/exct/0010/1996 and 4/97 with which we are directly concerned. these are as follows:ii. notification no. 8/96 : manu/exct/0010/1996 dated 23.07.1996-table(7) d.c. defibrillators for internal use and pacemakers.(16) implantable cardiac pacemakers.(58) pace maker.iii. notification no. 4/97 dated 01.03.97table217. medical equipment and other goods specified in list 6.list 6(7) dc defibrillators for internal use and pacemakers.(16) implantable cardiac pacemakers.(58) pace maker.14. from the reading of the aforesaid notifications, it becomes apparent that originally those d.c. defibrillators which were meant for both internal as well as external use and also pacemakers and their accessories etc. were eligible for exemption. certain goods which did not qualify for exemption like cardiac monitor, cardioscopes etc. were specifically excluded. on the other hand some of the components of d.c. defibrillators which were exempted from payment of excise duty were also specifically mentioned. for our purposes what is relevant is that in the original notification dated 11.06.1986, as amended on 01.03.1989 and 01.03.1994, the goods which qualified for exemption were "defibrillators for internal and external use and pacemakers and their accessories including patient cable internal defibrillator paddles 45mm and 55mm sizes". implantable cardiac pacemaker and accessories were also specifically included. this entry under went a substantial challenge in the notification no. 8/96 : manu/exct/0010/1996 dated 23.07.1996. in this notification, replacing the earlier notifications, defibrillators for external use are no more eligible for exemption. the entry now reads "d.c. defibrillator for internal use and pacemaker". thus, what is omitted is not only external use but also accessories of these d.c. defibrillators. likewise in place of earlier entry which mentioned on implantable cardiac pacemaker and accessories, entry in this notification confines only to implantable cardiac pacemakers. accessories thereof are specifically removed from exemptions. moreover in place of pacemaker wires now it is only pacemaker. though in the earlier notification, patient cable for pacemaker was included as exempted item, it is omitted altogether in notification no. 8/96 : manu/exct/0010/1996. this position is maintained in notification no. 4/97 dated 01.03.1997.15. keeping in view the aforesaid characteristic and feature of the notifications in question, in contradistinction to the position which prevailed in the earlier notification dated 11.06.1986 as amended from time to time and taken note of above, we have to examine as to whether the defibrillator of the appellant would be covered by these two notifications.16. it is not disputed by the appellant that their defibrillators are primarily meant for external use. it is, however, contended that this can be used internally as well. it is also admitted case that the defibrillator manufactured by the appellant is not implantable internally in the human body. the only justification given by the appellant is that at the time of carrying out the open heart surgery same device can be used to deliver electrical shock. however, it is accepted that to give the electrical shock paddles are needed, which is sold by the appellant only as an accessory. not only this, while selling the defibrillators said paddlers are not sold as an integral component/accessory of the main equipment. to the contrary, their purchase is optional, meaning thereby the choice is that the buyer to purchase paddle or not. during the arguments it was conceded that 99 per cent sale of these defibrillators were without paddles which means that predominantly the goods are sold for external use only. we would also like to reproduce, at this stage the description of the goods in question as given by the appellant itself in the operating and service manual of the product in question. it reads as follows:descriptionbpl's portable defibrillator/monitor is designed to provide external counter shocks and to display hear rate and eco wave forms on the scope screen....delivery of the monophasic countershock pulse (lown/edmark waveform) is triggered by depressing the discharge buttons on both of the anterior paddles, or if internal paddles are used, by depressing the int., paddle discharge button located on the control panel optional anterior paddles are equipped with a charge push button that functions the same way as the set charge manual push button does.17. going by the aforesaid features of the appellant's goods in question which are primarily meant for external use, simply because it can be used internally as well but not without the paddles and paddle is optional accessory, it is difficult to hold that conditions contained in the exemption notifications are satisfied. we are making these remarks in the context of the notification in question when contrasted with the earlier notification, as already described above. on these facts the third member of the tribunal in the impugned order made the following analysis:5. as mentioned earlier, the notification no. 339/86 as amended by notification nos. 88/89 and 58/94 took in both dc defibrillator for internal and external use. while including accessories in the above items specific reference was made to 'internal defibrillator paddles with 45mm and 55mm sizes'. it is relevant to note that there is a marked difference in the description of the item when it came to notification nos. 8/96 : manu/exct/0010/1996 and 4/97. there is no reference to d.c. defibrillator for external use or a specific reference to 'internal defibrillator paddles'. even according to the assessee, its product can be treated as d.c. defibrillators for internal use only when it is fitted with internal defibrillators. admittedly assessee is clearing defibrillators without such 'internal defibrillators paddles' also. a reference to assessee's operating and service manual also would show that 'internal defibrillator paddles' are only optional accessories. defibrillators for external use which are once included in the exempted category are not taken out of such category under notification nos. 8/96 : manu/exct/0010/1996 and 4/97. if the assessee's contention is to be accepted then in spite of such specific exclusion its product will continue to get benefit of exemption on the basis of supply of some optional accessories like internal paddle.6. the material produced by the revenue before the commissioner and accepted by him were later made available toe the assessee before this tribunal. arguments were addressed by both on that basis. the relevant portion from the commissioner's order is quoted below:internal cardioverter defibrillators (icd) were originally developed and have been most frequently used for prevention of sudden cardiac death (www.americanheart.org). a modern internal defibrillator is much smaller and is implanted in the upper chest. newer devices are a combination of icd and pacemaker in the unit. these combination icd/pacemakers are implanted in patients who require both devices (www.emedicine.com)........ this device is a small electric generator hooked up to wires called leads. a typical icd weighs about 4 ounces and measures about 1/2 inch thick by 2 inches wide and is implanted under the skin in the upper chest. leads are the wires that conduct the icd to the heart the tip of which is placed against the heart's inner wall and carries electric impulses from the icd to the heart through the cut vein into the heart's chambers beginning with the right ventricle (www.chfpatients.com).7. the above would show that d.c. defibrillators for internal use included in the exempted category cannot be taken as a defibrillator for external use cleared by the appellant with an accessory of internal defibrillators paddles. a reference to reply received from jerry potts to the appellant's query would also lead such a conclusion. the reply reads as follows:implantable defibrillators are definitely distinct from 'internal' defibrillators used during surgery to countershock the heart. if anything, the term internal defibrillator, as you defined it in your message, more closely relates to an external defibrillator. that is because the device typically used to manually deliver a counter shock to the myocardium during open hart surgery is identical to those defibrillators that externally deliver transthoracic shocks to a closed chest (except for the peddles that are used.)therefore, the defibrillator used during open heart surgery is identical to the defibrillators used to deliver transthoracic shocks externally except for the internal paddles additionally provided. exclusion of defibrillators for external use from the exemption provisions in notification nos. 8/96 : manu/exct/0010/1996 and 4/97 cannot be ignored. appellant's product which is basically a defibrillator for external use but capable of using during open heart surgery if the optional accessory of internal defibrillators paddles are also provided, cannot be treated as defibrillators for internal use are contemplated in the exemption provisions.18. we approve the aforesaid reasoning and rational given by the tribunal in coming to the conclusion that the goods of the appellant would not qualify the description contained in notification nos. 8/96 : manu/exct/0010/1996 and 4/97. it is trite that strict interpretation is to be given to the exemption notifications and it is upon the assessee to approve that he fulfills all the conditions of eligibility under such notifications. this is so held by this court in rajasthan spinning and weaving mills, bhilwara, rajasthan v. collector of central excise, jaipur, rajasthan manu/sc/0729/1995manu/sc/0729/1995 : (1995) 4 scc 473, wherein this principle was stated in the following manner:16. lastly, it is for the assessee to establish that the goods manufactured by him come within the ambit of the exemption notification. since, it is a case of exemption from duty, there is no question of any liberal construction to extent the term and the scope of the exemption notification. such exemption notification must be strictly construed and the assessee should bring himself squarely within the ambit of the notification. no extended meaning can be given to the exempted item to enlarge the scope of exemption granted by the notification.19. this principle has been reiterated time and again. it is not necessary to take note of all such cases. we would however like to reproduce the restatement of this member by the constitutional bench of this court in commissioner of central excise, new delhi v. hari chand shri gopal and ors. (2001) 1 scc 236, as follows:29. the law is well settled that a person who claims exemption or concession has to establish that he is entitled to that exemption or concession. a provision providing for an exemption, concession or exception, as the case may be, has to be construed strictly with certain exceptions depending upon the settings on which the provision has been placed in the statute and the object and purpose to be achieved. if exemption is available on complying with certain conditions, the conditions have to be complied with. the mandatory requirements of those conditions must be obeyed or fulfilled exactly, though at times, some latitude can be shown, if there is a failure to comply with some requirements which are directory in nature, the non-compliance of which would not affect the essence or substance of the notification granting exemption.30. in novopan india ltd. (novopan india ltd. v. cce and customs manu/sc/1216/1994manu/sc/1216/1994 : 1994 supp (3) scc 606) this court held that a person, invoking an exception or exemption provisions, to relieve him of tax liability must establish clearly that he is covered by the said provisions and, in case of doubt or ambiguity, the benefit of it must go to the state. a constitution bench of this court in hansraj gordhandas v. cce and customs (manu/sc/0265/1968manu/sc/0265/1968 : air 1970 sc 755 : (1969) 2 scr 253) held that (novopan india ltd. case, scc p. 614, para 16):16...such a notification has to be interpreted in the light of the words employed by it and not on any other basis. this was so held in the context of the principle that in a taxing statute, there is no room for any intendment, that regard must be had to the clear meaning of the words and that the matter should be governed wholly by the language of the notification i.e. by the plain terms of the exemption.20. having regard to the above it is difficult to accept the contention of mr. datar, learned senior counsel who appeared for the appellant, predicated on the submission that such defibrillator of the appellant is capable of internal use and, therefore, it would be covered by the aforesaid notifications. no doubt there is difference between the 'actual use' and 'intended for use' and even when a product is not actually used but is capable of being used, it would be treated as the product 'for use' as held in state of haryana v. dalmia dardri cement limited manu/sc/0593/1987manu/sc/0593/1987 : (1987) supp scc 679. however, in the present case we find that defibrillator when sold without paddle is not capable of being used internally and paddle is only sold as optional accessory.21. for the same reason, judgment in the case of collector of customs, bombay v. handicraft exports manu/sc/1273/1997manu/sc/1273/1997 : (1997) 7 scc 144 will also have no application to the instance case. in that case exemption from import duty was provided in respect of 'embellishment for footwear under the notification. the court held that the imported goods need not be capable of being exclusively used as embellishment for footwear but may also be capable for being used for other purposes. here, as noted above, defibrillators are not capable of being used internally without paddles and paddle is an accessory which does not qualify for exemption any longer. it would be pertinent to note that in handicraft export's case this court also held that importer will have to prove that the goods were not only capable of being utilized as embellishment for shoes but also that the same were imported for and were actually been used for embellishment for footwear. in the present case as defibrillators are sold without paddles, obviously the sale as such is not intended by the purchaser to be used for internal purpose. we are, therefore, of the view that the majority opinion of the tribunal is correct in law.22. this leaves us with the question of extended period of limitation invoked by the department. it was contended that the declaration given by the appellant was bona fide and such bona fides were clear from the fact that law on this issue was not free from doubt which can be gathered from the fact that even the impugned judgment of the tribunal is not unanimous as the member (judicial) had taken a different view which was in favour of the appellant. however, we find that the third member did not decide this issue and left it for the regular bench to consider the same, with the direction that the appeal would be placed before the regular bench. without awaiting the decision the appellant filed the present appeal challenging the impugned order passed by the third member. since we are affirming the decision rendered by the majority, it will now be for the tribunal to consider the issue of limitation.23. insofar as the present appeals are concerned, the same are dismissed.no costs.
dipak misra, j.1. the appellant entered into an agreement on 08.04.1993 with cochin cement limited-a company registered under the companies act, 1956. the relevant clauses of the agreement are as follows:1. acc shall sell to cocem cement clinker ex its wadi cement works on regular basis at the supply rate of 300 t per day so as to enable cocem to produce ordinary portland cement or any other type of cement as per the marketing need from time to time. the price of clinker will be linked to the price of cement in the kerala market and will be reviewed every six months on this basis. the formula for such price adjustments will be as detailed in annexure 'a' attached to and forming part of this agreement. for the sake of easier operation of the contract it is agreed that a specific quantify of clinker supplied by acc for any six months period will have a co-relation with the price at which the cement will be handed over to acc for sale during the said period of six months. any shortfall on either side in the matter of supply of clinker from acc and supply of cement by cocem would have to be made good at the already agreed rate prior to finalisation of price for the subsequent period.xxxxx xxxxx3. cocem shall entrust to acc all matters pertaining to quality assurances in respect of cement produced by cocem. acc shall arrange to depute its personnel to the factory of cocem with a view to ensure that quality of cement produced is as per the internal norms/standard of acc. fees to be paid by cocem to acc for this service shall be mutually agreed upon by the parties separately.4. cement produced by cocem under acc's brand same shall only be marketed by acc and shall not complete with cement directly supplied to the kerala market by acc.5. clinker ground into cement shall be purchased by acc at a mutually agreed price which will include the cost that acc may incur in organising marketing and sale of cement manufactured by cocem. cocem will supply cement to different parties strictly as per the programme given by acc. in respect of direct consumers of cement the billing may be done by cocem directly to the party strictly in accordance with the direction given by acc. cement will be branded as 'acc'. for use of acc brand name and rendering marketing services cocem will pay rs. 75/- per tonne as charges. this charge will remain firm for 5 years and will be subjected to revision thereafter on mutual terms.xxxxx xxxxx7. any complaints/claims arising out of quality of cement, damages, shortages, poor packing due to negligence on the part of cocem would be debited to cocem.xxxxx xxxxx11. cocem shall not use acc's trade marks/brand names in any form after the termination or expiry of this agreement.2. on the basis of the aforesaid agreement, the appellant-assessee put forth his stand before the assessing officer that his case was covered under section 5(2) of the kerala general sales tax act, 1963 (for brevity, "the act") and, therefore, the sale effected by the cochin cement limited should be treated as the first sale. the assessing officer, on the basis of intelligence report and other materials brought on record, came to the conclusion that the cochin cement limited had been manufacturing the cement and handing over the same to the assessee. on a perusal of the impugned orders, it is noticeable that the report of the concerned intelligent officer has met with approval up to the revisional stage. to have a complete picture we may usefully reproduce the finding recorded by the assessing officer in the order of assessment:as per schedule to the agreement, associated cement cos. is charging rs. 150/- per ton for marketing and service charges and only after deducting that amount, associated cement company need pay the balance to cochin cement ltd., after adjusting the price of clinker. during the course of inspection on 16.4.99 effected in the premises of cochin cement ltd., at ernakulam a copy of the report regarding cement marketing prepared by sri s.r. iyer, senior dy. general manager, cochin cement ltd., was recovered by intelligence squad no. 1, ernakulam which reveals that cement manufactured by cochin cement ltd. is fully marketed by associated cement company, in its brand name. it is also stated that the responsibility of clinker supply and also the marketing and selling the cement produced by cochin cement ltd., lies with associated cement company from the above, it is evident that cochin cement ltd. is only a manufacturer of cement and that too by using the raw material supplied by the assessee with specified quality of acc standard and entire cement manufactured are to be delivered at different depots of the assessee. only assessee is marketing the cement and cochin cement ltd. is not entitled to sell out even a single bag of cement in the market over and above the programme given by the assessee. entire goods manufactured are delivered at assessee's depots and is being marketed by assessee in its brand name. and all the sales effected through depots of the assessee have alone being assessed under section 5(2) of kgst act newly amended. only those cement which has been manufactured by cochin cement ltd. and sold by assessee in its brand name revealed and accounted in the assessee's books of accounts has been brought to tax by this order. in other words, if cochin cement ltd. is selling goods to others by itself, the question of coming those transaction into the books of accounts of the assessee does not arise at all. in the circumstances, the contention of the assessee that cochin cement ltd. is marketing cement to the customers by itself falls to the ground.the said authority has further opined:the question of brand name in this case arose in respect of goods manufactured by cochin cement ltd., and sold by the assessee. it is, only for the sake of marketing that brand name is used by the assessee in respect of cement manufactured by the cochin cement ltd. a stranger company, other than assessee, the brand name is the brand name allotted to associated cement company, under the trade and mercantile act and those goods manufactured by a company, other than associated cement company, if sold by acc under its brand name it will very well come under the purview of newly introduced section. therefore, the contention that cochin cement ltd., is brand name holder is a very feable augment. sub-section 2 of section 5 reads.notwithstanding anything contained in this act in respect of goods other than tea sold in auction in the state, which are sold under a trade mark or brand name, the sale by the brand name holder or the trade mark holder within the state shall be the first sale for the purpose of this act". the impugned transaction is a typical one coming under the above provision. the cement sold by the assessee is one which is manufactured by cochin cement ltd. and from cochin cement ltd. assessee purchased and cement so purchased sold under its brand name "acc" and claimed exemption as second sale. but by virtue of above said provision, the assessee's 2nd sale is treated as first sale.3. be it noted, the order of assessment has received the stamp of approval by the higher authorities as well as by the high court. in this backdrop, we may proceed to analyse the statutory scheme. section 5(1) of the act, which is the charging section, reads as follows:every dealer (other than a casual trade or agent of an non-resident dealer) whose total turnover for a year is not less than two lakh rupees and every casual trader or agent of a non-resident dealer, whatever be his total turnover for the year, shall pay tax on his taxable turnover of that year.4. mr. s. ganesh, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant, has laid immense emphasis on section 5(2), which reads thus:notwithstanding anything contained in this act in respect [of manufactured goods other than tea] which are sold under the trade mark or brand name, the sale by the brand name holder or the trade mark holder within the state shall be the first sale for the purposes of this act.5. the learned senior counsel would contend that the cochin cement limited is the brand name holder of the present appellant and, therefore, the sale at its hand has to be treated as first sale for the purposes of this act. in this regard, we think it appropriate to refer to section 5(2a) and 5(2b) of the act, which read thus:5(2a) where a dealer liable to tax under sub-section (1), sells any goods to a trade mark or brand name holder for sale a trade mark or brand name, no such dealer shall be liable to pay tax under the said sub-section, if he produces before the assessing authority a declaration in the prescribed form from that trade mark or brand name holder.5(2b) where a trade mark or brand name holder consumes the goods purchased by under-section 2(a), in the manufacture of other goods or uses or disposes of such goods in any manner otherwise than by way of sale within the state or despatches such goods to any place outside the state, otherwise than by way of inter-state sale, such trade mark or brand name holder shall be liable to pay tax on the turnover relating to such purchase for the year irrespective of the quantum of his total turnover.6. on a conjoint reading of the aforesaid provisions, it is discernible that the legislature has clearly expressed its intention to treat the sale by the brand name holder or the trade mark holder as the first sale. in the case of cryptom confectioneries pvt. ltd. v. state of kerala manu/sc/0501/2014manu/sc/0501/2014 : (2014) 73 vst 498 (sc), section 5(2a) came up for consideration and a two-judge bench, analysing the anatomy of the provision, has laid down thus:the aforesaid sub-section commences with a non obstante clause i.e., irrespective of section 5(1) of the act or any other provision under the act. the said sub-section speaks of a sale made by a brand name holder of the trade mark holder within the state. the legislature deems that such a sale by the brand name holder or the trade mark holder shall be the first sale within the state. in our opinion this is the only possible construction that can be given to sub-section (2) of section 5 of the act. keeping in view the aforesaid provision, let us once again trace the transaction between the appellant and the licensee, namely, m/s. bristo foods pvt. ltd.7. on a scrutiny of the facts of the said case, it is manifest that the issue that squarely fell for consideration is whether the sale at the hands of the appellant therein would be treated as the first sale. dealing with the stand of the appellant, this court stated:according to the appellant/assessee who is a branded name holder, m/s. bristo foods pvt. ltd., has licence and is permitted to use the branded name "crytm". the licensee manufactures the goods, namely, confectioneries and effect supply of sale to the brand name holder. it is the brand name holder, who effects the sale of the confectioneries which are to be taxed as item 39 of the first schedule to the act within the state. therefore, it is the brand name holder, who has to be pay tax under section 5(2) of the act. if for any reason m/s. bristo foods pvt. ltd. has paid the tax while effecting the supply of the manufactured commodity to the appellant/assessee, the appellant/assessee and m/s. bristo foods pvt. ltd. can approach the authorities for claiming the refund of the tax paid by them.8. on a careful appreciation of the aforesaid decision, we find the factual matrix therein is explicitly the same as is in the present case. however, mr. s. ganesh, learned senior counsel, would submit that in the said case, there has been no consideration of the concepts like brand name holder and trade mark holder and, therefore, the said decision should not be treated as a precedent. on the basis of the aforesaid submission, mr. ganesh contends that the said decision requires reconsideration and this court should refer it to a larger bench. mr. ganesh further submits that the ratio of the decision has to be understood in the background of the facts of the case and a decision is an authority for what is actually decides, not what logically follows from it. according to him, as the relevant provisions have not been construed, it cannot be regarded as a binding precedent.9. needless to say, the proposition canvassed by mr. ganesh neither invites a dispute nor calls for a debate. it is so the said proposition has been stated in quinn v. leathem (1901) ac 495 which has been followed in ambica quarry works v. state of gujarat and ors. manu/sc/0853/1988manu/sc/0853/1988 : air 1987 sc 1073. but such is not the case here. first of all, in the earlier decision section 5(2) was considered and a view has been expressed and, therefore, it cannot be said that a provision has not been referred to or not considered. hence, it is a binding precedent.10. the second issue, which has been ambitiously projected by mr. ganesh, is that the decision, even if a binding precedent, requires reconsideration as the relevant terms employed in section 5(2), have not been appositely considered. what is limpid is that section 5(2) is an expression of the legislative intention that the sales at the hands of the brand name holder and trade mark holder would be treated as the first sale. on a perusal of the agreement entered into between the parties, it is not remotely suggestive of the fact that cochin cement limited is a brand name holder or trade mark holder. hence, the ambitious submission of mr. ganesh has to melt as a glacier, and we say so. ergo, the decision in cryptom confectioneries pvt. ltd. does not require reconsideration.11. in view of the aforesaid analysis, the appeals, being devoid of merit, are dismissed. there shall be no order as to costs.
arijit pasayat, j.1. all these cases relate to the establishment and functioning of courts described as fast track courts and, therefore, are disposed of by this common judgment. the eleventh finance commission (hereinafter referred to as the 'finance commission') allocated rs. 502.90 crores under article 275 of the constitution of india, 1950 (in short 'the constitution') for the purpose of setting up of 1734 courts in various states to deal with long pending cases, particularly, sessions cases. as allocation of funds made by the finance commission stipulated time bound utilization within a period of five years, various state governments were required to take necessary steps to establish such courts. it appears that the finance commission had suggested that the states may consider re-employment of retired judges for limited period, for the disposal of pending cases, since these courts were to be ad hoc in the sense that they would not be a permanent addition to the number of courts within a particular state. challenge was made to the scheme known as the fast track courts scheme in various high courts, primarily on the ground that there was no constitutional sanction for employment of retired judges and effective guidelines were not in operation. it was also highlighted that infrastructural facilities were not available so as to make scheme a reality. several such deficiencies were pointed out. a plea was made that instead of retired officers, eligible members of the bar should be considered for appointment.2. stand of the union of india on the other hand was that on the recommendations of the finance commission, a note was prepared by the department of justice, government of india. there is no mandatory requirement for appointment of retired sessions/additional sessions judges or other officers. ad hoc promotion of judicial officers was also contemplated. it was pointed out that consequential vacancies created on account of ad hoc promotions can be filled up by a special drive so that there is no shortfall in the personnel of the lower courts.3. learned counsel appearing for the various parties were unanimous on one important aspect i.e. the problems created by long pendency of cases in different courts all over the country. it was also conceded that any effort for reducing the pendency is a welcome step. keeping in view the importance of the matter, learned counsel for the parties were asked to give their suggestions. mr. harish n. salve, learned solicitor general has given several suggestions with which we shall deal later. learned counsel for the other parties have more or less agreed to the suggestions, except to the suggestion regarding appointment of retired judges, more particularly, those with adverse service records.4. the anxiety of all concerned about quick dispensation of justice has been succinctly stated by one of us (hon'ble kirpal, j as he then was) in all india judges association & ors. v. union of india & ors.in the following words:"an independent and efficient judicial system is one of the basic structures of our constitution. if sufficient number of judges are not appointed, justice would not be available to the people, thereby undermining the basic structure. it is well known that justice delayed is justice denied. time and again the inadequacy in the number of judges has adversely been commented upon. not only have the law commission and the standing committee of parliament made observations in this regard, but even the head of the judiciary, namely, the chief justice of india has had more occasions than once to make observations in regard thereto. under the circumstances, we feel it is our constitutional obligation to ensure that the backlog of the cases is decreased and efforts are made to increase the disposal of cases. apart from the steps which may be necessary for increasing the efficiency of the judicial officers, we are of the opinion that time has now come for protecting one of the pillars of the constitution, namely, the judicial system, by directing increase, in the first instance, in the judge strength from the existing ratio of 10.5 or 13 per 10 lakhs people to 50 judges for 10 lakh people. we are conscious of the fact that overnight these vacancies cannot be filled. in order to have additional judges, not only the posts will have to be created but infrastructure required in the form of additional court rooms, building, staff, etc., would also have to be made available. we are also aware of the fact that a large number of vacancies as of today from amongst the sanctioned strength remain to be filled. we, therefore, first direct that the existing vacancies in the subordinate courts at all levels should be filled, if possible, latest by 31st march, 2003, in all the states. the increase in the judge strength to 50 judges per 10 lakh people should be effected and implemented with the filling up of the posts in a phased manner to be determined and directed by the union ministry of law, but this process should be completed and the increased vacancies and posts filled within a period of five years from today. perhaps increasing the judge strength by 10 per 10 lakh people every year could be one of the methods which may be adopted thereby completing the first stage within five years before embarking on further increase if necessary."5. the following observations of a seven judge bench in a recent decision [ p. ramachandra rao v. state of karnataka manu/sc/0328/2002manu/sc/0328/2002 : 2002crilj2547 ] are also relevant:"a perception of the cause for delay at the trial and in conclusion of criminal proceedings is necessary so as to appreciate whether setting up bars of limitation entailing termination of trial or proceedings can be justified. the root cause for delay in dispensation of justice in our country is poor judge-population ratio. law commission of india in its 120th report on man power planning in judiciary (july 1987), based on its survey, regretted that in spite of article 39a added as a major directive principle in the constitution by 42nd amendment (1976), obliging the state to secure such operation of legal system as it promotes justice and to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen. several reorganization proposals in the field of administration of justice in india have been basically patch work, ad hoc and unsystematic solutions to the problem. the judge-population-ratio in india (based on 1971 census) was only 10.5 judges per million population while such ratio was 41.6 in australia, 50.9 in england, 75.2 in canada and 107 in unites states. the law commission suggested that india required 107 judges per million of indian population; however to begin with the judge strength needed to be raised to five-fold, i.e. 50 judges per million population in a period of five years but in any case not going beyond ten years. touch of said sarcasm is difficult to hid when the law commission observed (in its 120th report, ibid) that adequate reorganization of the indian judiciary is at the one and at the same time everybody's concern and, therefore, nobody's concern."6. we find substance in the stand taken by the learned counsel who have highlighted the non-desirability of appointing judicial officers who did not carry good reputation so far as their honesty and integrity is concerned. it is to be noted that in all india judges' association v. union of india and ors., manu/sc/0039/1992manu/sc/0039/1992 : (1993)illj723sc and in all india judges' association and ors. v. union of india and ors. manu/sc/0391/1993manu/sc/0391/1993 : (1993)iillj776sc , this court took note of the non-desirability to grant the benefit of two years extension in service i.e. from 58 years to 60 years in the case of officers who were not found to be of continued utility. in each case an evaluation of the service records was directed to be undertaken to find out whether the officer has or lacks potentiality for getting such benefit.7. the qualities desired of a judge can be simply stated: 'that if he be a good one and that he be thought to be so'. such credentials are not easily acquired. the judge needs to have 'the strength to put an end to injustice' and 'the faculties that are demanded of the historian and the philosopher and the prophet'. a few paragraphs from the book "judges" by david panicky which are often quoted need to be set out here:"the judge has burdensome responsibilities to discharge. he has power over the lives and livelihood of all those litigants who enter his court.... his decisions may well affect the interests of individuals and groups who are not present or represented in court. if he is not careful, the judge may precipitate a civil war... or he may accelerate a revolution.... he may accidentally cause a peaceful but fundamental change in the political complexion of the country.* * * *judges today face tribulations, as well as trials, not contemplated by their predecessors.... parliament has recognized the pressures of the job by providing that before the lord chancellor recommends anyone to the queen for appointment to the circuit bench, the lord chancellor 'shall take steps to satisfy himself that the person's health is satisfactory'.... this seems essential in the light of the reminiscences of lord roskill as to the mental strain which the job can impose.... lord roskill added that, in his experience, 'the work load is intolerable: seven days a week, 14 hours a day'...* * * *he [judge] is a symbol of that strange mixture of reality and illusion, democracy and privilege, humbug and decency, the subtle network of compromises, by which the nation keeps itself in its familiar shape."8. burger c.j. of the american supreme court once observed: "a sense of confidence in the courts is essential to maintain the fabric of ordered liberty for a free people and it is for the subordinate judiciary by its action and the high court by its appropriate control to ensure it".9. one of the pleas taken by the parties questioning constitutional validity of the fast track courts scheme is that constitution does not envisage establishment of fast track courts. this plea is clearly without any substance. as observed by a nine-judge bench of this court in supreme court advocates-on-record association and ors. v. union of india, manu/sc/0073/1994manu/sc/0073/1994 : air1994sc268 , appointment of a person to be a district judge rests with the governor, but he cannot make the appointment unless there has been an effective and meaningful consultation with the high court or the high court has recommended the appointment. in order that the requirement of consultation does not end up as an empty formality, in the event of difference of opinion, there must be an effective interchange of viewpoints. in cases governed by article 233(2), as a matter of rule, the high court's recommendation must be accepted. departure from the opinion of the high court should be a rare event. the constitution relies on the collective wisdom of the high court as a body and not that of any single individual. though the fast track courts scheme is envisaged by the central government on the basis of the views indicated by the finance commission, yet appointments to the fast track courts are to be made by the high court keeping in view the modalities set out. therefore, merely because the suggestion has stemmed from the central government; it cannot be said that there has been any violation of any constitutional mandate. it is to be noted that chapter vi of the constitution deals with subordinate courts. while article 233 relates to the recruitment to the district judges, article 234 relates to the recruitment of members of the judicial service of the state other than district judges. the power of appointment under article 234 does not include the power to confirm the promotion of judicial officers other than judicial officers which is vested exclusively in the high court by article 234. any rule which provides that the authority belongs to the governor in consultation with the high court, shall be void, as observed by this court in state of assam and anr. v. s.n. sen and anr., manu/sc/0686/1971manu/sc/0686/1971 : [1972]2scr251 . while the promotion of district judges shall be in the hands of the governor acting in consultation with the high court in terms of article 235, the posting and promotion etc. of officers of the state judicial services other than the district judges lie exclusively in the hands of the high court. the word "control" referred to in article 235 is used in a comprehensive sense to include general superintendence of the working of the subordinate courts. in other words the control vested in the high court under this article is complete control, subject only to the power of the governor in the matter of appointment and promotion of district judges. the provision under this article is to ensure independence of judiciary. above being the position there is nothing constitutionally improper in the scheme. it is the high court which has to play a pivotal role in the implementation of the scheme for its effective implementation and achievement of the above objectives, of course, complying with the constitutional requirements embodied in relevant provisions of chapter vi of the constitution.10. keeping in view the laudable objectives with which the fast tract courts scheme has been conceived and introduced, we feel the following directions, for the present, would be sufficient to take care of initial teething problems highlighted by the parties:directions by the court:1. the first preference for appointment of judges of the fast track courts is to be given by ad-hoc promotions from amongst eligible judicial officers. while giving such promotion, the high court shall follow the procedures in force in the matter of promotion to such posts in superior/higher judicial services.2. the second preference in appointments to fast track courts shall be given to retired judges who have good service records with no adverse comments in their acrs, so far as judicial acumen, reputation regarding honesty, integrity and character are concerned. those who were not given the benefit of two years extension of the age of superannuation, shall not be considered for appointment. it should be ensured that they satisfy the conditions laid down in article 233(2) and 309 of the constitution. the concerned high court shall take a decision with regard to the minimum- maximum age of eligibility to ensure that they are physically fit for the work in fast track courts.3. no judicial officer who was dismissed or removed or compulsorily retire or made to seek retirement shall be considered for appointment under the scheme. judicial officers who have sought voluntary retirement after initiation of departmental proceedings/inquiry shall not be considered for appointment.4. the third preference shall be given to members of the bar for direct appointment in these courts. they should be preferably in the age group of 35-45 years, so that they could aspire to continue against the regular posts if the fast track courts cease to function. the question of their continuance in service shall be reviewed periodically by the high court based on their performance. they may be absorbed in regular vacancies, if subsequent recruitment takes place and their performance in the fast track courts is found satisfactory. for the initial selection, the high court shall adopt such methods of selection as are normally followed for selection of members of the bar as direct recruits to the superior/higher judicial services.5. overall preference for appointment in fast track courts shall be given to eligible officers who are on the verge of retirement subject to they being physically fit.6. the recommendation for selection shall be made by a committee of at least three judges of the high court, constituted by the chief justice of the concerned high court in this regard. the final decision in the matter shall be taken by the full court of the high court.7. after ad-hoc promotion of judicial officers to the fast track courts, the consequential vacancies shall be filled up immediately by organizing a special recruitment drive. steps should be taken in advance to initiate process for selection to fill up these vacancies much before the judicial officers are promoted to the fast track courts, so that vacancies may not be generated at the lower levels of the subordinate judiciary. the high court and the state government concerned shall take prompt steps to fill up the consequential as well as existing vacancies in the subordinate courts on priority basis. concerned state government shall take necessary decisions within a month from the receipt of the recommendations made by the high court.8. priority shall be given by the fast track courts for disposal of those sessions cases which are pending for the longest period of time, and/or those involving under-trials. similar shall be the approach for civil cases i.e. old cases shall be given priority.9. while the staff of a regular court of additional district and sessions judge includes a sessions clerk and an office peon, work in fast track courts is reported to be adversely affected due to shortage of staff as compared to regular courts performing same or similar functions. when single orderly or clerk proceeds on leave, work in fast track courts gets held up. the staff earmarked for each such court are a peshkar/superintendent, a stenographer and an orderly. if the staff is inadequate, high court and the state government shall take appropriate decision to appoint additional staff who can be accommodated within the savings out of the existing allocations by the central government.10. provisions for the appointment of public prosecutor and process server have not been made under the fast track courts scheme. a public prosecutor is necessary for effective functioning of the fast track courts. therefore, a public prosecutor may be earmarked for each such court and the expenses for the same shall be borne out of the allocation under the head 'fast track courts'. process service shall be done through the existing mechanism.11. a state level empowered committee headed by the chief secretary of the state shall monitor the setting up of earmarked number of fast track courts and smooth functioning of such courts in each state, as per the guidelines already issued by the government of india.12. the state governments shall utilize the funds allocated under the fast track courts scheme promptly and will not withhold any such funds or divert them to other uses. they shall send the utilization certificates from time to time to the central government; who shall ensure immediate release of funds to the state government on receipt of required utilization certificates.13. at least one administrative judge shall be nominated in each high court to monitor the disposal of cases by fast track courts and to resolve the difficulties and shortcomings, if any, with the administrative support and cooperation of the concerned state government. state government shall ensure requisite cooperation to the administrative judge.14. no right will be conferred on judicial officers in service for claiming any regular promotion on the basis of his/her appointment on ad-hoc basis under the scheme. the service rendered in fast track courts will be deemed as service rendered in the parent cadre. in case any judicial officer is promoted to higher grade in the parent cadre during his tenure in fast track courts, the service rendered in fast track courts will be deemed to be service in such higher grade.15. the retired judicial officers who are appointed under the scheme shall be entitled to pay and allowances equivalent to the pay and allowance they were drawing at the time of their retirement, minus total amount of pension drawn/payable as per rules.16. persons appointed under the scheme shall be governed, for the purpose of leave, reimbursement of medical expenses. ta/da and conduct rules and such other service benefits, by the rules and regulations which are applicable to the members of the judicial services of the state of equivalent status.17. the concerned high court shall periodically review the functioning of the fast track courts and in case of any deficiencies and/or shortcoming, take immediate remedial measures, taking into account views of the administrative judge nominated.18. the high court and the state government shall ensure that there exists no vacancy so far as the fast track courts are concerned, and necessary steps in that regard shall be taken within three months from today. in other words, steps should be taken to set up all the fast track courts within the stipulated time.11. it was submitted by learned counsel appearing for some of the parties that officers with tainted images have been appointed as fast track courts. it is for the high court of the concerned state to see if any undesirable person not fulfilling the requirements indicated in our directions above has been appointed, and to take immediate steps for terminating the appointment.12. copies of the judgment be sent by the registry of this court to each high court and the concerned state government for ensuring compliance with our directions.14. though these petitions are to be treated as closed, quarterly status reports shall be submitted by each high court and the state government. first such report shall be submitted by the end of august, 2002. the reports shall be placed for consideration before the bench to be fixed by hon'ble the chief justice of india.
r.c. lahoti, j.1. no person shall be deprived of his life or his personal liberty except according to procedure established by law-declares article 21 of the constitution. life and liberty, the words employed in shaping article 21, by the founding fathers of the constitution, are not to be read narrowly in the sense drearily dictated by dictionaries, they are organic terms to be construed meaningfully. embarking upon the interpretation thereof, feeling the heart-throb of the preamble, deriving strength from the directive principles of state policy and alive to their constitutional obligation, the courts have allowed article 21 to stretch its arms as wide as it legitimately can. the mental agony, expense and strain which a person proceeded against in criminal law has to undergo and which, coupled with delay, may result in impairing the capability or ability of the accused to defend himself have persuaded the constitutional courts of the country in holding the right to speedy trial a manifestation of fair, just and reasonable procedure enshrined in article 21. speedy trial, again, would encompass within its sweep all its stages including investigation, inquiry, trial, appeal, revision and re-trial - in short everything commencing with an accusation and expiring with the final verdict - the two being respectively the terminus a quo and terminus ad quem --of the journey which an accused must necessarily undertake once faced with an implication. the constitutional philosophy propounded as right to speedy trial has though grown in age by almost two and a half decades, the goat sought to be achieved is yet a far-off peak. myriad fact-situations bearing testimony to denial of such fundamental right to the accused persons, on account of failure on the part of prosecuting agencies and executive to act, and their turning an almost blind eye at securing expeditious and speedy trial so as to satisfy the mandate of article 21 of the constitution have persuaded this court in devising solutions which go to the extent of almost enacting by judicial verdict bars of limitation beyond which the trial shall not proceed and the arm of law shall lose its hold. in its zeal to protect the right to speedy trial of an accused, can the court devise and almost enact such bars of limitation though the legislature and the statutes have not chosen to do so-is a question of far-reaching implication which has led to the constitution of this bench of seven-judge strength.2. in criminal appeal no. 535/2000 the appellant was working as an electrical superintendent in the mangalore city corporation. for the check period 1.5.1961 to 25.8.1987 he was found to have amassed assets disproportionate to his known sources of income. charge-sheet accusing him of offences under section 13(1)(e) read with section 13(2) of the prevention of corruption act, 1988 was filed on 15.31994. accused appeared before the special court and was enlarged on bail on 6.6.1994. charges were framed on 10.8.1994 and the case proceeded for trial on 8.11.1994. however, the trial did not commence. on 23.2.1999 the learned special judge who was seized of the trial directed the accused to be acquitted as the trial had not commenced till then and the period of two years had elapsed which obliged him to acquit the accused in terms of the directions of this court in raj deo sharma v. state of bihar -(manu/sc/0640/1998manu/sc/0640/1998 : 1998crilj4596 (hereinafter, raj deo sharma-i ). the state of karnataka through the d.s.p. lokayukta, mangalore preferred an appeal before the high court putting in issue the acquittal of the accused. the learned single judge of the high court, vide the impugned order, allowed the appeal, set aside the order of acquittal and remanded the case to the trial court, forming an opinion that a case charging an accused with corruption was an exception to the directions made in raj deo sharma-i as clarified by this court in raj deo sharma (ii) v. state of bihar - manu/sc/0607/1999manu/sc/0607/1999 : 1999crilj4541 . strangely enough the high court not only condoned a delay of 55 days in filing the appeal against acquittal by the state but also allowed the appeal itself-both without even issuing notice to the accused. the aggrieved accused has filed this appeal by special leave. similar are the facts in all the other appeals. shorn of details, suffice it to say that in all the appeals the accused persons who were facing corruption charges, were acquitted by the special courts for failure of commencement of trial in spite of lapse of two years from the date of framing of the charges and all the state appeals were allowed by the high court without noticing the respective accused persons.3. the appeals came up for hearing before a bench of three learned judges who noticed the common ground that the appeals in the high court were allowed by the learned judge thereat without issuing notice to the accused and upon this ground alone, of want of notice, the appeals here at could be allowed and the appeals before the high court restored to file for fresh disposal after notice to the accused but it was felt that a question arose in these appeals which was likely to arise in many more and therefore the appeals should be heard on their merits. in the order dated september 19, 2000, the bench of three learned judges stated:"the question is whether the earlier judgments of this court, principally, in common cause v. union of india manu/sc/1152/1996manu/sc/1152/1996 : 1996crilj2380 , common cause v. union of india manu/sc/0976/1996manu/sc/0976/1996 : air1996sc3538 raj deo sharma v. state of bihar manu/sc/0640/1998manu/sc/0640/1998 : 1998crilj4596 and raj deo sharma (ii) v. state of bihar manu/sc/0607/1999manu/sc/0607/1999 : 1999crilj4541 , would apply to prosecution under the prevention of corruption act and other economic offences.having perused the judgments afore-mentioned, we are of the view that these appeals should be heard by a constitution bench. we take this view because we think that it may be necessary to synthesize the various guidelines and directions issued in these judgments. we are also of the view that a constitution bench should consider whether time limits of the nature mentioned in some of these judgments can, under the law, be laid down".4. on 25th april, 2001 the appeals were heard by the constitution bench and during the course of hearing attention of the constitution bench was invited to the decision of an earlier constitution bench in abdul rehman antulay and ors. v. r.s. nayak and anr. - manu/sc/0326/1992manu/sc/0326/1992 : 1992crilj2717 and the four judgments referred to in the order of reference dated 19th september, 2000 by the bench of three learned judges. it appears that the learned judges of the constitution bench were of the opinion that the directions made in the two common cause cases and the two raj deo sharma's cases ran counter to the constitution bench directions in abdul rehman antulay's case, the latter being five-judge bench decision, the appeals deserved to be heard by a bench of seven learned judges. the relevant part of the order dated 26th april, 2001 reads as under:-"the constitution bench judgment in a.r. antulay's case holds that "it is neither advisable nor feasible to draw or prescribe an outer time limit for conclusion of all criminal proceedings". even so, the four judgments afore-mentioned lay down such time limits. two of them also lay down to which class of criminal proceedings such time limits should apply and to which class they should not.we think, in these circumstances, that a bench of seven learned judges should consider whether the dictum afore-mentioned in a.r. antulay's case still holds the field: if not, whether the general directions of the kind given in these judgments are permissible in law and should be upheld.having regard to what is to be considered by the bench of seven learned judges, notice shall issue to the attorney general and the advocates general of the states.the papers shall be placed before the hon'ble the chief justice for appropriate directions. having regard to the importance of the matter, the bench may be constituted at an early date".5. on 20.2.2002 the court directed, "common cause", the petitioner in the two common cause cases which arose out of writ-petitions under article 32 of the constitution, heard and decided by this court as public interest litigations, to be noticed. "common cause" has responded and made appearance through counsel.6. we have heard shri harish salve, the learned solicitor general appearing for attorney general for india, mr. ranjit kumar, senior advocate assisted by ms. binu tamta, advocate for the appellants mr. sanjay r. hegde and mr. satya mitra, advocates for the respondents. mr. s. murlidhar, advocate for "common cause" and such other advocates general and standing counsel who have chosen to appear for the states.7. we shall briefly refer to the five decision cited in the order of reference as also to a few earlier decisions so as to highlight the issue posed before us.8. the width of vision cast on article 21, so as to perceive its broad sweep and content, by seven-judge bench of this court in mrs. maneka gandhi v. union of india and anr., manu/sc/0133/1978manu/sc/0133/1978 : [1978]2scr621 , inspired a declaration of law, made on february 12, 1979 in hussainara khatoon and ors. (i) v. home secretary, state of bihar - manu/sc/0119/1979manu/sc/0119/1979 : 1979crilj1036 , that article 21 confers a fundamental right on every person not to be deprived of his life or liberty, except according to procedure established by law; that such procedure is not some semblance of a procedure but the procedure should be "reasonable, fair and just"; and therefrom flows, without doubt, the right to speedy trial. the court said - "no procedure which does not ensure a reasonably quick trial can be regarded as 'reasonable, fair or just and it would fall foul of article 21. there can, therefore, be no doubt that speedy trial, and by speedy trial we mean reasonably expeditious trial, is an integral and essential part of the fundamental right to life and liberty enshrined in article 21." many accused persons tormented by unduly lengthy trial or criminal proceedings, in any forum whatsoever were enabled, by hussainara khatoon(i) statement of law, in successfully maintaining petitions for quashing of charges, criminal proceedings and/or conviction, on making out a case of violation of article 21 of the constitution. right to speedy trial and fair procedure has passed through several milestones on the path of constitutional jurisprudence. in maneka gandhi (supra) , this court held that the several fundamental rights guaranteed by part iii required to be read as components of one integral whole and not as separate channels. the reasonableness of law and procedure, to withstand the test of articles 21 19 and 14, must be right and just and fair and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive, meaning thereby that speedy trial must be reasonably expeditious trial as an integral and essential part of the fundamental right of life and liberty under article 21. several cases marking the trend and development of law applying maneka gandhi and hussainara khatoon(i) principles to myriad situations came up for the consideration of this court by a constitution bench in abdul rehman antulay and ors. v. r.s. nayan and ors. - manu/sc/0326/1992manu/sc/0326/1992 : 1992crilj2717 , (a.r. antulay, for short). the proponents of right to speedy trial strongly urged before this court for taking one step forward in the direction and prescribing time limits beyond which no criminal proceeding should be allowed to go on, advocating that unless this was done. maneka gandhi and hussainara khatoon(i) exposition of article 21 would remain a mere illusion and a platitude. invoking of the constitutional jurisdiction of this court so as to judicially forge two termini and lay down periods of limitation applicable like a mathematical formula, beyond which a trial or criminal proceeding shall not proceed, was resisted by the opponents submitting that the right to speedy trial was an amorphous one something less than other fundamental rights guaranteed by the constitution. the submissions made by proponents included that the right to speedy trial following from article 21 to be meaningful, enforceable and effective ought to be accompanied by an outer limit beyond which continuance of the proceedings will be violative of article 21. it was submitted that section 468 of the code of criminal procedure applied only to minor offences but the court should extend the same principle to major offences as well. it was also urged that a period of 10 years calculated from the date of registration of crime should be placed as an outer limit wherein shall be counted the time taken by the investigation.9. the constitution bench, in a.r. antulay's case, heard elaborate arguments. the court, it its pronouncement, formulated certain propositions, 11 in number, meant to serve a guidelines. it is not necessary for our purpose to reproduce all those propositions. suffice it to state that in the opinion of the constitution bench (i) fair, just and reasonable procedure implicit in article 21 of the constitution creates a right in the accused to be tried speedily; (ii) right to speedy trial following from article 21 encompasses all the stages, namely, the stage of investigation, inquiry, trial, appeal, revision and re-trial; (iii) who is responsible for the delay and what factors have contributed towards delay relevant factors. attendant circumstances, including nature of the offence, number of accused and witnesses, the work-load of the court concerned, prevailing local conditions and so on-what is called the systemic delays must be kept in view; (iv) each and every delay does not necessarily prejudice the accused as some delays indeed work to his advantage. guidelines 8, 9, 10 and 11 are relevant for our purpose and hence are extracted and reproduced hereunder:-"(8) ultimately, the court has to balance and weight the several relevant factors-'balancing test' or 'balancing process'-and determine in each case whether the right to speedy trial has been denied in a given case.(9) ordinarily speaking, where the court comes to the conclusion that right to speedy trial of an accused has been infringed the charges or the conviction, as the case may be, shall be quashed. but this is not the only course open. the nature of the offence and other circumstances in a given case may be such that quashing of proceedings may not be in the interest of justice. in such a case, it is open to the court to make such other appropriate order-including an order to conclude the trial within a fixed time where the trial is not concluded or reducing the sentence where the trial has concluded as may be deemed just and equitable in the circumstances of the case.(10) it is neither advisable nor practicable to fix any time-limit for trial of offences. any such rule is bound to be qualified one. such rule cannot also be evolved merely to shift the burden of proving justification on the shoulders of the prosecution. in every case of complaint of denial of right to speedy trial, it is primarily for the prosecution to justify and explain the delay. at the same time, it is the duty of the court to weight all the circumstances of a given case before pronouncing upon the complaint. the supreme court of usa too has repeatedly refused to fix any such outer time-limit in spite of the sixth amendment. nor do we think that not fixing any such outer limit in effectuates the guarantee of right to speedy trial.(11). an objection based on denial of right to speedy trial and for relief on that account, should first be addressed to the high court. even if the high court entertains such a plea, ordinarily it should not stay the proceedings, except in a case of grave and exceptional nature. such proceedings in high court must, however, be disposed of on a priority basis."10. during the course of its judgment also the constitution bench made certain observations which need to be extracted and reproduced:-"but then speedy trial or other expressions conveying the said concept-are necessarily relative in nature. one may ask-speedy means, how speedy? how long a delay is to long? we do not think it is possible to lay down any time schedules for conclusion of criminal proceedings. the nature of offence, the number of accused, the number of witnesses, the workload in the particular court, means of communication and several other circumstances have to be kept in mind". (para 83).".....it is neither advisable nor feasible to draw or prescribe an outer time-limit for conclusion of all criminal proceedings. it is not necessary to do so for effectuating the right to speedy trial. we are also not satisfied that without such an outer limit, the right becomes illusory". (para 83)".....even apart from article 21 courts in this country have been cognizant of undue delays in criminal matters and wherever there was inordinate delay or where the proceedings were pending for too long and any further proceedings were deemed to be oppressive and unwarranted, they were put an end to by making appropriate orders". (para 65)[emphasis supplied]11. in 1986, "common cause"-a registered society, espousing public causes, preferred a petition under article 32 of the constitution of india seeking certain directions. by a brief order (" common cause" a registered society through its director v. union of india and ors. -(1996) 4 scc 32, hereinafter common cause (i) , a two-judge bench of this court issued tow sets of directions: one, regarding bail, and the other, regarding quashing of trial. depending on the quantum of imprisonment provided for several offences under the indian penal code and the period of time which the accused have already spent in jail, the undertrial accused confined in jails were directed to be released on bail or on personal bond subject to such conditions as the court may deem fit to impose in the light of section 437 of cr.p.c. the other set of directions directed the trial in pending cases to be terminated and the accused to be discharged or acquitted depending on the nature of offence by reference to (i) the maximum sentence inflictable whether fine only or imprisonment, and if imprisonment, then the maximum set out in the law, and (ii) the period for which the case has remained pending in the criminal court.12. a perusal of the directions made by the division bench shows the cases having been divided into two categories: (i) traffic offences, and (ii) cases under ipc or any other law for the time being in force. the court directed the trial courts to close such cases on the occurrence of following event and the period of delay:-category (i) : traffic offences:13. the court directed the cases to be closed and the accused to be discharged on lapse of more than two years on account of non-serving of summons to the accused or for any other reason whatsoever.category (ii) : cases under ipc or any other law for the time being in force:14. the court directed that in the following sub-categories if the trial has not commenced and the period noted against cash sub-category has elapsed then the case shall be closed and the accused shall be discharged or acquitted-15. the period of pendency was directed to be calculated from the date the accused are summoned to appear in court. the division bench, vide direction 4, specified certain categories of cases to which its directions would not be applicable. vide direction 5, this court directed the offences covered by direction 4 to be tried on priority basis and observance of this direction being monitored by the high courts. all the directions were made applicable not only to the cases pending on the day but also to cases which may be instituted thereafter.16. abovesaid directions in common cause-i were made on may 1, 1996. not even a period of 6 months had elapsed, on 15.10.1996, shri sheo raj purohit a public-spirited advocate addressed a letter petition to this court, inviting its attention to certain consequences flowing from the directions made by this court in common cause (i) and which were likely to cause injustice to the serious detriment of the society and could result in encouraging dilatory tactics adopted by the accused. a two-judge bench of this court, which was the same as had issued directions in common cause (i), made three directions which had the effect of clarifying/modifying the directions in common cause (i) . the first direction clarified that the time spent in criminal proceedings, wholly or partly, attributable to the dilatory tactics or prolonging of trial by action of the accused, or on account of stay of criminal proceedings secured by such accused from higher courts shall be excluded in counting the time-limit regarding pendency of criminal proceedings. second direction defined the terminus a quo, i.e. what would be the point of commencement of trial while working out 'pendency of trials' in sessions court, warrant cases and summons cases. in the third direction, the list of cases, by reference to nature of offence to which directions in common cause (i) would not apply, was expanded.17. in raj deo sharma (i), an accused charged with offences under sections 5(2) & 5(1)(c) of the prevention of corruption act, 1947 came up to this court, having failed in high court, seeking quashing of prosecution against him on the ground of violation of right to speedy trial. against him the offence was registered in 1982 and chargesheet was submitted in 1985. the accused appeared on 24.4.1987 before the special judge. charges were framed on 4.3.1993. until 1.6.1995 only 3 out of 40 witnesses were examined. the three-judge bench of this court, which heard the case, set aside the order passed by the high court and sent the matter back to the special judge for passing appropriate orders in the light of its judgment. vide para 17, the three-judge bench issued five further directions purporting to be supplemental to the propositions laid down in a.r. antulay . the directions need not be reproduced and suffice it to observe that by dividing the offence into two categories - those punishable with imprisonment for a period not exceeding 7 years and those punishable with imprisonment for a period exceeding 7 years, the court laid down periods of limitation by reference to which either the prosecution evidence shall be closed or the accused shall be released on bail. so far as the trial for offences is concerned, for the purpose of making directions, the court categorized the offences and the nature and period of delay into two, which may be set out in a tabular form as under:-18. the consequence which would follow on completion of two or three years, as abovesaid, is, the court directed, that the trial court shall close the prosecution evidence and can proceed to the next step of trial in respect of the second category, the court added a rider by way of exception stating-"unless for very exceptional reasons to be recorded and in the interest of justice, the court considers it necessary to grant further time to the prosecution to adduce evidence beyond the aforesaid time limit" (of three years). the period of inability for completing prosecution evidence attributable to conduct of accused in protracting the trial and the period during which trial remained stayed by orders of the court or by operation of law was directed to be excluded from calculating the period at the end of which the prosecution evidence shall be closed. further, the court said that the directions made by it shall be in addition to and without prejudice to the directions issued in common cause (i) as modified in common cause (ii) .19. raj deo sharma (i) came up once again for consideration of this court in- raj deo sharma v. state of bihar manu/sc/0607/1999manu/sc/0607/1999 : 1999crilj4541 , hereinafter raj deo sharma (ii) . this was on an application filed by central bureau of investigation (cbi) for clarification (and also for some modification) in the directions issued. the three-judge bench which heard the matter consisted of k.t. thomas, j. and m. srinivasan, j. who were also on the bench issuing directions in raj deo sharma (i) and m.b. shah, j. who was not on the bench in raj deo sharma (i). in the submission of cbi the directions of the court made in raj deo sharma (i) ran counter to a.r. antulay and did not take into account the time taken by the court on account of its inability to carry on day to day trial due to pressure of work. the cbi also pleaded for the directions in raj deo sharma (i) being made prospective only, i.e., period prior to the date of directions in raj deo sharma (i) being excluded from consideration. all the three learned judges wrote separate judgments. k.t. thomas, j. by his judgment, to avert 'possibility of miscarriage of justice', added a rider to the directions made in raj deo sharma (i) that an additional period of one year can be claimed by the prosecution in respect of prosecutions which were pending on the date of judgment in raj deo sharma (i) and the court concerned would be free to grant such extension if it considered it necessary in the interest of administration of criminal justice. m. srinivasan, j. in his separate judgment, assigning his own reasons, expressed concurrence with the opinion expressed and the only clarification ordered to be made by k.t. thomas, j. and placed on record his express disagreement with the opinion recorded by m.b. shah, j.20. m.b. shah, j. in his dissenting judgment noted the most usual causes for delay in delivery of criminal justice as discernible from several reported cases travelling upto this court and held that the remedy for the causes of delay in disposal of criminal cases lies in effective steps being taken by the judiciary, the legislature and the state governments, all the three. the dangers behind constructing time-limit barriers by judicial dictum beyond which a criminal trial or proceedings could not proceed, in the opinion of m.b. shah, j., are (i) it would affect the smooth functioning of the society in accordance with law and finally the constitution. the victims left without any remedy would resort to taking revenge by unlawful means resulting in further increase in the crime and criminals. people at large in the society would also feel unsafe and insecure and their confidence in the judicial system would be shaken. law would lose its deterrent effect on criminals; (ii) with the present strength of judge and infrastructure available with criminal courts it would be almost impossible for the available criminal courts to dispose of the cases within the prescribed time-limit; (iii) prescribing such time-limits may run counter to the law specifically laid down by constitution bench in antulay's case . in the fore-quoted thinking of m.b. shah, j. we hear the echo of what constitution bench spoke in kartar singh v. state of punjab - manu/sc/0029/1956manu/sc/0029/1956 : 1956crilj945 , vide para 351, "no doubt, liberty of a citizen must be zealously safeguarded by the courts; nonetheless the courts while dispensing justice in case like the one under the tada act, should keep in mind not only the liberty of the accused but also the interest of the victim and their near and dear and above all the collective interest of the community and the safety of the nation so that the public may not lose faith in the system of judicial administration and indulge in private retribution."21. at the end m.b. shah, j. opined that order dated 8.10.1998 made in raj deo sharma (i) requires to be held in abeyance and the state government and registrars of the high courts ought to be directed to come up with specific plans for the setting up of additional courts/special courts (permanente de ad hoc) to cope up with the pending workload on the basis of available figures of pending cases also by taking into consideration the criteria for disposal of criminal cases prescribed by various high courts. in conclusion, the court directed the application filed by the cbi to be disposed of in terms of the majority opinion.22. a perception of the cause for delay at the trial and in conclusion of criminal proceedings is necessary so as to appreciate whether setting up bars of limitation entailing termination of trial or proceedings can be justified. the root cause for delay in dispensation of justice in our country is poor judge-population-ratio. law commission of india in its 120th report on manpower planning in judiciary (july 1987), based on its survey, regretted that in spite of article 39a added as a major directive principle in the constitution by 42nd amendment (1976), obliging the state to secure such operation of legal system as promotes justice and to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen several reorganisation proposals in the field of administration of justice in india have been basically patch work, ad hoc and unsystematic solutions to the problem. the judge-population-ratio in india (based on 1971 census) was only 10.5 judges per million population while such ratio was 41.6 in australia, 50.9 in england, 75.2 in canada and 107 in united states. the law commission suggested that india required 107 judges per million of indian population; however to begin with the judge strength needed to be raised to five-fold, i.e., 50 judges per million population in a period of five years but in any case not going beyond ten years. touch of sad sarcasm is difficult to hide when the law commission observed (in it 10th report, ibid) that adequate reorganisation of the indian judiciary is at the one and at the same time everybody's concern and, therefore, nobody's concern. there are other factors contributing to the delay at the trial. in a.r. antulay's case, vide para 83, the constitution bench has noted that in spite of having proposed to go on with the trial of a case, five days a week and week after week, it may not be possible to conclude the trial for reasons, viz. (1) non-availability of the counsel, (2) non-availability of the accused, (3) introductory proceedings, and (4) other systemic delays. in addition, the court noted that in certain cases there may be a large number of witnesses and in some offences, by their very nature, the evidence may be lengthy. in kartar singh v. state of punjab manu/sc/0029/1956manu/sc/0029/1956 : 1956crilj945 : 1956crilj945 another constitution bench opined that the delay is dependent on the circumstances of each case because reasons for delay will vary, such as (i) delay in investigation on account of the widespread ramifications of crimes and its designed network either nationally or internationally, (ii) the deliberate absence of witness or witnesses, (iii) crowded dockets on the file of the court etc. in raj deo sharma (ii) , in the dissenting opinion of m.b. shah, j., the reasons for delay have been summarized as, (1) dilatory proceedings; (2) absence of effective steps towards radical simplification and streamlining of criminal procedure; (3) multitier appalls revision applications and diversion to disposal of interlocutory matters; (4) heavy dockets; mounting arrears delayed service of process; and (5) judiciary, starved by executive by neglect of basic necessities and amenities, enabling smooth functioning.23. several cases coming to our notice while hearing appeals, petitions and miscellaneous petitions (such as for bail and quashing of proceedings) reveal, apart from inadequate judge strength, other factors contributing to the delay at the trial. generally speaking, these are: (i) absence of or delay in appointment of, public prosecutors proportionate with the number of courts/cases; (ii) absence of or belated service of summons and warrants on the accused/witnesses; (iii) non-production of undertrial prisoners in the court; (iv) presiding judge proceeding on leave, though the cases are fixed for trial; (v) strikes by members of bar; and (vi) counsel engaged by the accused suddenly declining to appear or seeking an adjournment for personal reasons or personal inconvenience. it is common knowledge that appointments of public prosecutors are politicized. by convention, government advocates and public prosecutors were appointed by the executive on the recommendation of or in consultation with the head of judicial administration at the relevant level but gradually the executive has started bypassing the merit based recommendations of, or process of consultation with, district and sessions, judges. for non-service of summons/orders and non-production of under trial prisoners, the usual reasons assigned are shortage of police personnel and police people being busy in vip duties or law and order duties. these can hardly be valid reasons for not making the requisite police personnel available for assisting the courts in expediting the trial. the members of the bar shall also have to realize and remind themselves of their professional obligation-legal and ethical, that having accepted a brief for an accused they have no justification to decline or avoid appearing at the trial when the case is taken up for hearing by the court. all these factors demonstrate that the goal of speedy justice can be achieved by a combined and result-oriented collective thinking and action on the part of the legislature, the judiciary, the executive and representative bodies of members of bar.24. is it at all necessary to have limitation bars terminating trials and proceedings? is there no effective mechanisms available for achieving he same end? the criminal procedure code, as it stands, incorporates a few provisions to which resort can be had for protecting the interest off the accused and saving him from unreasonable prolixity or laxity at the trial amounting to oppression. section 309, dealing with power to postpone or adjourn proceedings, provides generally for every inquiry or trial, being proceeded with as expeditiously as possible, and in particular, when the examination of witnesses has once begun, the same to be continued from day to day until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the court finds the adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded. explanation-2 to section 309 confers power on the court to impose costs to be paid by the prosecution or the accused, in appropriate cases, and putting the parties on terms while granting an adjournment or postponing of proceedings. this power to impose costs is rarely exercised by the courts, section 258, in chapter xx of cr.p.c. on trial of summons-cases, empowers the magistrate trying summons cases instituted otherwise than upon complaint, for reasons to be recorded by him, to stop the proceedings at any stage without pronouncing any judgment and where such stoppage of proceedings is made after the evidence of the principal witnesses has been recorded, to pronounce a judgment of acquittal, and in any other case, release the accused, having effect of discharge. this provision is almost never used by the courts. in appropriate cases, inherent power of the high court, under section 482 can be invoked to make such orders, as may be necessary, to give effect to any order under the code of criminal procedure or to prevent abuse of the process of any court, or otherwise, to secure the ends of justice. the power is wide and, if judiciously and consciously exercised, a can take care of almost all the situations where interference by the high court becomes necessary on account of delay in proceedings or for any other reason amounting to oppression or harassment in any trial, inquiry or proceedings. in appropriate cases, the high courts have exercise their jurisdiction under section 482 of cr.p.c. for quashing of first information report and investigation, and terminating criminal proceedings if the case of abuse of process of law was clearly made out. such power can certainly be exercised on a case being made out of breach of fundamental right conferred by article 21 of the constitution. the constitution bench in a.r. antulay's case referred to such power, vesting in the high court (vide paras 62 and 65 of its judgment) and held that it was clear that even apart from article 21, the courts can take care of undue or inordinate delays in criminal matters or proceedings if they remain pending for too long and putting to an end, by making appropriate orders, to further proceedings when they are found to be oppressive and unwarranted.25. legislation is that source of law which consists in the declaration of legal rules by a competent authority. when judges by judicial decisions lay down a new principle of general application of the nature specifically reserved for legislature they may be said to have legislated, and not merely declared the law. salmond on principles of jurisprudence (12th edition) goes on to say- "we must distinguish law-making by legislators from law-making by the courts. legislators can lay down rules purely for the future and without reference to any actual dispute; the courts, insofar as they create law, can do so only in application to the cases before them and only insofar as is necessary for their solution. judicial law-making is incidental to the solving of legal disputes; legislative law-making is the central function of the legislator'(page 115). it is not difficult to perceive the dividing line between permissible legislation by judicial directives and enacting law-the field exclusively reserved for legislature. we are concerned here to determine whether in prescribing various periods of limitation, adverted to above, the court transgressed the limit of judicial legislation.26. bars of limitation judicially engrafted, are no doubt , meant to provide a solution to the aforementioned problems. but a solution of this nature gives rise to grater problems like scuttling a trial without adjudication, stultifying access to justice and giving easy exit from the portals of justice. such general remedial measures cannot be said to be apt solutions. for two reasons we hold such bars of limitation uncalled for and impermissible; first, because it tantamount to impermissible legislation- an activity beyond the power which the constitution confers on judiciary, and secondly, because such bars of limitation fly in the face of law laid down by constitution bench in a.r. antulay's case and, therefore, run counter to the doctrine of precedents and their binding efficacy.27. in am monograph "judicial activism and constitutional democracy in india" commended by professor sir william wade, q.c. as a "small book devoted to a big subject", the learned author, while recording appreciation of judicial activism, sounds a note of caution-"it is plain that the judiciary is the least competent to function as a legislative or the administrative agency. for one thing, courts lack the facilities to gather detailed data or to make probing enquiries. reliance on advocates who appear before them for data is likely to give them partisan or inadequate information. on the other hand if court have to rely on their own knowledge or research it is bound to be selective and subjective. courts also have no means for effectively supervising and implementing the aftermath of their orders, schemes and mandates, since courts mandate for isolated cases, their decrees make no allowance for the differing and varying situations which administrators will encounter in applying the mandates to other cases. courts have also no method to reverse their orders if they are found unworkable or requiring modification". highlighting the difficulties which the courts are likely to encounter if embarking in the fields of legislation or administration, the learned author advises "the supreme court could have well left the decision-making to the other branches of government after directing their attention to the problems rather than itself entering the remedial field".28. the primary function of judiciary is to interpret the law. it may lay down principles, guidelines and exhibit creativity in the field left open and unoccupied by legislation. patrick devlin in 'the judge' (1979) refers to the role of the judge as lawmaker and states that there is no doubt that historically judges did not make law, at least in the sense of formulating it. even now when they are against innovation, they have never formally abrogated their powers; their attitude is;" we could if we would but we think it better not' but as a matter of history did the english judges of the golden age make law? they decided case which worked up into principles. the judges, as lord wright once put it in an unexpectedly picturesque phrase, proceeded 'from case to case, like the ancient mediterranean mariners, hugging the coast from point and avoiding the dangers of the open sea of system and science. the golden are judges were not rationalisers and, except in the devising of procedures, they were not innovators. they did not design a new machine capable of speeding ahead; they struggled with the aid of fictions and bits of procedural string to keep the machine on the road.29. professor s.p. sathe, in his recent work (year 2002) "judicial activism in india-transgressing borders and enforcing limits", touches the topic "directions: a new form of judicial legislation". evaluating legitimacy of judicial activism, the learned author has cautioned against court "legislating" exactly in the way in which a legislature legislates and he observes by reference to a few case that the guidelines laid down by court, at times, cross the border of judicial law making in the realist sense and trench upon legislating like a legislature. "directions are either issued to fill in the gaps in the legislation or to provide for matters that have not been provided by any legislation. the court has taken over the legislative function not in the traditional interstitial sense but in an overt manner and has justified it as being an essential component of its role as a constitutional court." (p.242). " in a strict sense these are instances of judicial excessive that fly in the face of the doctrine of separation of powers. the doctrine of separation of powers envisages that the legislature should make law, the executive should execute it, and the judiciary should settle disputes in accordance with the existing law. in reality such watertight separation exists nowhere and is impracticable. broadly, it means that one organ of the state should not perform a function that essentially belongs to another organ. while law-making through interpretation and expansion of the meanings of open-textured expressions such as 'due process of law', 'equal protection of law,' of 'freedom of speech and expression' is a legitimate judicial function, the making of an entirely new law.. thought directions.... is not legitimate judicial function." (p.220).30. prescribing periods of limitation at the end of which the trial court would be obliged to terminate the proceedings and necessarily acquit or discharge the accused, and further, making such directions applicable to all the cases in the present and for the future amounts to legislation, which, in our opinion, cannot be done by judicial directives and within the arena of the judicial law-making power available to constitutional courts, howsoever liberally we may interpret articles 32 21 141 and 142 of the constitution. the dividing line in fine but perceptible. courts can declare the law, they can interpret the law, they can remove obvious lacunae and fill the gaps but they cannot entrench upon in the field of legislation properly meant for the legislature. binding directions can be issued for enforcing the law and appropriate directions may issue, including laying down of time limits or chalking out a calendar for proceedings to follow, to redeem the injustice done or for taking care of rights violated in a given case or set of cases, depending on facts brought to the notice of court. this is permissible for judiciary to do. but it may not, like legislature, enact a provision akin to or on the liens of chapter xxxvi of the code of criminal procedure, 1973.31. the other reason why the bars of limitation enacted in common cause (i), common cause (ii) and raj deo sharma (ii) and raj deo sharma (ii) cannot be sustained is that these decisions though two or three-judge bench decisions run counter to that extent to the dictum of constitution bench in a.r. antulay's case and therefore cannot be said to be good law to the extent they are in breach of the doctrine of precedents. the well settled principle of precedents which has crystalised into a rule of law is that a bench of lesser strength is bound by the view expressed by a bench of larger strength and cannot take a view in departure or in conflict therefore. we have in the earlier part of this judgment extracted and reproduced passages from a.r. antulay's case . the constitution bench turned down the fervent plea of proponents of right to speedy trial for laying down time-limits as bar beyond which a criminal proceedings or trial shall not proceed and expressly ruled that it was neither advisable nor practicable (and hence not judicially feasible) to fix and time-limit for trial of offences. having placed on record the exposition of law as to right to speedy trial flowing from article 21 of the constitution this court held that it was necessary to leave the rule as elastic and not to fix it in the frame of defined and rigid rules. it must be left to the judicious discretion of the court seized of an individual case to find out from the totality of circumstances of a given case if the quantum of time consumed upto a given point of time amounted to violation of article 21, and if so, then to terminate the particular proceedings, and if not, then to proceed ahead. the test is whether the proceedings or trial has remained. pending for such a length of time that he inordinate delay can legitimately be called oppressive and unwarranted, as suggested in a.r. antulay . in kartar singh's cases (supra) the constitution bench while recognising the principle that the denial of an accused' right of speedy trial may result, in a decision to dismiss the indictment or in reversing of a conviction, went on to state, "of course, no length of time is per se too long pass scrutiny under this principle nor the accused is called upon to show the actual prejudice by delay of disposal of cases. on the other hand, the court has to adopt a balancing approach by taking note of the possible prejudices and disadvantages to be suffered by he accused by avoidable delay and to determine whether the accused in a criminal proceedings has been deprived of his right of having speedy trial with unreasonable delay which could be identified by the factors-(1) length of delay, (2) the justification for the delay, (3) the accused's assertion of his right to speedy trial, and (4) prejudice caused to the accused the such delay." (para 92).32. for all the foregoing reasons, we are of the opinion that in common cause case (i) (as modified in common cause (ii) and raj deo sharma (i) and (ii) , the court could not have prescribed periods of limitation beyond which the trial of a criminal case or a criminal proceedings cannot continue and must mandatorily be closed followed by an order acquitting or discharging the accused. in conclusion we hold:-(1) the dictum in a.r. antulays' case is correct and still holds the field.(2) the propositions emerging from article 21 of the constitution and expounding the right to speedy trial laid down as guidelines in a.r. antulays' case , adequately take care of right to speedy trial. we uphold and re-affirm the said propositions.(3) the guidelines laid down in a.r. antulay's case are not exhaustive but only illustrative. they are not intended to operate as hard and fast rules or to be applied like a strait-jacket formula. their applicability would depend on the fact-situation of each case. it is difficult to foresee all situations and no generalization can be made.(4) it is neither advisable, nor feasible, nor judicially permissible to draw or prescribe can outer limit for conclusion of all criminal proceedings. the time-limits or bars of limitation prescribed in the several directions made in common cause (i), raj deo sharma (i) and raj deo sharma (ii) could not have been so prescribed or drawn and are not good law. the criminal courts are not obliged to terminate trial or criminal proceedings merely on account of lapse of time, as prescribed by the directions made uncommon cause case (i), raj deo sharma case (i) and (ii) . at the most the periods of time prescribed in those decisions can be taken by the courts seized of the trial or proceedings to act as reminders when they may be persuaded to apply their judicial mind to the facts and circumstances of the case before them and determine by taking into consideration the several relevant factors as pointed out in a.r. antulay's case and decided whether the trial or proceedings have become so inordinately delayed as to be called oppressive and unwarranted. such time-limits cannot and will not by themselves be treated by any court as a bar to further continuance of the trial or proceedings and as mandatorily obliging the court to terminate the same and acquit or discharge the accused.(5) the criminal courts should exercise their available powers. such as those under sections 309 311 and 258, of code of criminal procedure to effectuate the right to speedy trial. a watchful and diligent trial judge can prove to be better protector of such right than any guidelines. in appropriate cases jurisdiction of high court under section 482 of cr.p.c. and articles 226 and 227 of constitution can be invoked seeking appropriate relief or suitable directions.(6) this is an appropriate occasion to remind the union of india and the state governments of their constitutional obligation to strengthen the judiciary-quantitatively and qualitatively-by providing requisite funds, manpower and infrastructure. we hope and trust that the governments shall act.33 we answer the questions posed in the orders of reference dated september 19, 2000 and april 26,2001 in the abovesaid terms.34. the appeals are allowed. the impugned judgments of the high court are set aside. as the high court not have condoned the delay in filing of he appeals and then allowed the appeals without noticing the respective accused-respondents before the high court, now the high court shall hear and decide the appeals afresh after noticing the accused-respondent before it in each of the appeals and consistently with he principles of law laid down hereinabove.35. before we may part, we would like to make certain observations ex abundanti cantela:36. firstly, we have dealt with the directions made by this court in common cause case i and ii and raj deo sharma case i and ii regarding trial of cases. the directions made in those cases regarding enlargement of accused persons on bail are not subject matter of this reference or these appeals and we have consciously abstained from dealing with legality, propriety or otherwise of directions in regard to bail. this is because different considerations arise before the criminal courts while dealing with termination of a trial or proceedings and while dealing with right of accused to be enlarged on bail.37. secondly, though we are deleting the directions made respectively by two and three-judge benches of this court in the cases under reference, for reasons which we have already stated, we should not, even for a moment, be considered as having made a departure from the law as to speedy trial and speedy conclusion of criminal proceedings of whatever nature and at whichever stage before any authority or the court. it is the constitutional obligation of the state to dispense speedy justice, more so in the field of criminal law, and paucity of funds or resources is no defence to denial of right to justice emanating from articles 21 19 and 14 and the preamble of the constitution as also from the directive principles of state policy. it is high time that the union of india and the various states realize their constitutional obligation and do something concrete in the direction of strengthening the justice delivery system. we need to remind all concerned of what was said by this court in hussainara khatoon (iv) - manu/sc/0121/1979manu/sc/0121/1979 : 1979crilj1045 : 1979crilj1045 , "the state cannot be permitted to deny the constitutional right of speedy trial to the accuse don the ground that the state has no adequate financial resources to incur the necessary expenditure needed for improving the administrate and judicial apparatus with a view to ensuring speedy trial. the state may have its financial constraints and is priorities ion expenditure, but, the law does not permit any government to deprive its citizens of constitutional rights on a plea of poverty's, or administrative inability."38. thirdly, we are deleting the bars of limitation on the twin grounds that it amounts to judicial legislation, which is not permissible, and because they run counter to the doctrine of binding precedents. the larger question of powers of the court to pass orders and issue directions in public interest or in social action litigations, specially by reference to articles 32 141 142 and 144 of the constitution, is not subject matter of reference before us and this judgment should not be read as an interpretation of those articles of the constitution and laying down, defining or limiting the scope of the powers exercisable thereunder by this court.39. and lastly, it is clarified that this decision shall not be a ground for re-opening a case or proceedings by setting aside any such acquittal or discharge as is based on the authority of ' common cause' and ' raj deo sharma' cases and which has already achieved finality and re-open the trial against the accused therein.doraiswamy raju, j.40. i have had the privilege of going through the judgment of esteemed and learned brother r.c. lahoti, j., while i am in respectful agreement that the appeals are to be allowed and remitted to the high court to be heard and decided afresh, i feel compelled to express my reservation and inability to subscribe to some of the observations contained therein relating to the powers and jurisdiction of this court.41. the declaration of law made by the constitution bench of five learned judges of this court in the decision reported in a.r. antulay's case manu/sc/0326/1992manu/sc/0326/1992 : 1992crilj2717 : 1992crilj2717 still holds the field and its binding force and authority has not been undermined or whittled down or altered in any manner by an other decision of a larger bench. consequently, the benches of lesser number of constitution of judges which dealt with the cases reported in " common cause" a regd. society through its director v. union of india and ors. manu/sc/1152/1996manu/sc/1152/1996 : 1996crilj2380 "common cause" a regd. society through its director v. union of india and ors. [(1996) 6 scc 775]; raj deo sharma v. state of bihar manu/sc/0640/1998manu/sc/0640/1998 : 1998crilj4596 : 1998crilj4596 and raj deo sharma (ii) v. state of bihar manu/sc/0607/1999manu/sc/0607/1999 : 1999crilj4541 could not have laid down any principles in derogation of the ratio laid down in a.r. antulay's case (supra) either by way of elaboration, expansion, clarification or in the process of trying to distinguish the same with reference to either the nature of causes considered therein or the consequences which are likely to follow and which, in their view, deserve to be averted. even where necessities or justification, if any, were found therefor, there could not have been scope for such liberties being taken to transgress the doctrine of binding precedents, which has come to stay firmly in our method of administration of justice and what is permissible even under such circumstances being only to have had the matter referred to for reconsideration by a larger bench of this court and not to deviate by no other means. the solitary reason would suffice by itself to overrule the above decisions, the correctness of which stand referred to for consideration by this bench. all the more so when, there is no reason to doubt the correctness of the decision in a.r. antulay's case (supra) and this bench concurs with the principles laid down therein.42. though this court does not consider itself to be an imperium in imperio or would function as a despotic branch of 'the state', the fact that the founding fathers of our constitution designedly and deliberately, perhaps, did not envisage the imposition of any jurisdiction embargo on this court, except in article 363 of the constitution of india is significant and sufficient enough, in my view, to identify the depth and width or extent of this powers. the other fetters devised or perceived on its exercise of powers or jurisdiction to entertain/deal with a matter were merely self-imposed for one or the other reason assigned therefore and they could not stand in the way of or deter this court in any manner from rising up to respond in a given situation as and when necessitated and effectively play its role in accommodating the constitution to changing circumstances and enduring values as a 'sentinel on the qui vive' to preserve and safeguard the constitution, prefect and enforce the fundamental rights and other constitutional mandates - which constitute the inviolable rights of the people as well as those features, which formed its basic structure too and considered to be even beyond the reach of any subsequent constitutional amendment. in substance, this court, in my view, is the ultimate repository of all judicial powers at national level by virtue of it being the summit court at the pyramidal height of administration of justice in the country and as the upholder and final interpreter of the constitution of india and defender of the fundamentals of 'rule of law'.43. it is not only difficult but impossible to foresee and enumerate all possible situations arising, to provide in advance solutions with any hard and fast rules of universal application for all times to come. it is well known that where there is right, there should be a remedy. in what exceptional cases, not normally visualized or anticipated by law, what type of an extra-ordinary remedy must be devised or designed to solve the issue arising would invariably depend upon the gravity of the situation, nature of violation and efficacy as well as utility of the existing machinery and the imperative need or necessity to find a solution even outside the ordinary framework or avenue or remedies to avert any resultant damage beyond repair or redemption, to any person. apparently, in my view, alive to such possibilities only even this court in a.r. antulay's case (supra) has chosen to decline the request for fixation of any period of time limit for trial of offences not on any total want or lack of jurisdiction in this court, but for the reason that it is "neither advisable nor practicable" to fix any such time limit and that the non-fixation does not in effectuate the guarantee of right to speedy trial. the prospects and scope to achieve the desired object of a speedy trial even within the available procedural safeguards and avenues provided for obtaining relief, have also been indicated in the said decision as well as in the judgment prepared by learned brother r.c. lahoti, j. i am of the firm opinion that this court should never venture to disown its own jurisdiction on any area or in respect of any matter or over any one authority or person, when the constitution is found to be at stake and the fundamental rights of citizens/persons are under fire, to restore them to their position and uphold the constitution and the rule of law-for which this court has been established and constituted with due primacy and necessary powers authority and jurisdiction, both express and implied.44. except dissociating myself from certain observations made expressing doubts about the jurisdiction of this court, for the reasons stated above, i am in entire agreement with the other reasons and conclusions in the judgment.
1. leave granted.we have heard learned counsel for the parties at length.the appellant herein had filed a complaint under section 138 of the negotiable instruments act, 1881, (hereinafter referred to as act'), inter alia, alleging therein that it had entered into a contract with the respondent herein as per which the appellant was to supply some material for the completion of certain project which was undertaken by the respondent. it was further stated that the respondent was supposed to make payment in terms of the said agreement as under:"payment1. rs. 25,000.00 at the time of release of purchase order2. rs. 25,000.00 at the time of board level demonstration.3. rs. 25,000.00 at the time of road trials.4. rs. 50,000.00 at the time of supply of units.5. balance rs. 50,000.00 plus the taxes applicable within 45 days from the date of supply of units.we hereby agree by the above payment terms signed by the petitioner and respondent."according to the appellant, it had made the requisite supplies and pursuant thereto, the respondent had issued two cheques dated 20.11.2003 and 30.11.2003 for rs. 25,000/- each. those cheques were returned dishonoured on presentation with the remarks 'insufficient funds'. when the respondent was informed about the same, he issued cheques for rs. 50,000/- and 75,000/-, which was the amount due for the work undertaken and completed by the appellant for the respondent, as under:"(1) cheque no. 795553 dated 22.11.2004 for rs. 50,000/- drawn on canara bank.(2) cheque no. 795554 dated 15.12.2004 for rs. 75,000/- drawn on canara bank."both the cheques were again returned by the bank uncleared with the endorsement 'insufficient funds'.2. the appellant thereupon issued legal notice dated 18.12.2004 to the respondent in which, inter alia, the following averments were made:"you are also aware of the fact that as per the said agreement my client has already supplied all the units to you and in acceptance of the said units you have issued the following cheques in favour of my client towards the payment of balance amounts."xxx - xxx xxx"believing your words my client has presented the following cheques.and both the cheques were returned by the bank, canara bank, sarakki layout branch, bangalore stating the reason as insufficient funds as per the endorsement i.e. memorandum of cheques unpaid, dated 10.12.2004 and 16.12.2004 respectively.thus you have committed an offence under section 138 of the negotiable instruments act read with section 420 of the indian penal code. and hence i hereby issue the following:you hereby take this notice that the cheques issued by you in favour of my client dated 22.12.2004 and 15.12.2004 bearing nos. 795553 and 795554 respectively, towards the payment of balance amount i.e. rs. 1,25,000.00 (rupees one lakh twenty five thousand) towards the design and development of avl units with base station unit supplied to you."3. pertinently no reply was given to these notices by the respondent which forced the appellant to file the aforesaid complaint under section 138 of the act.4. the trial court, after recording the evidences of both the parties in the said complaint, dismissed the complaint primarily on the ground that the appellant had not furnished any document to prove that it had actually supplied the material to the respondent as per the agreement. this finding is upheld by the high court also vide the impugned judgment.5. a neat submission which is made by mr. sushil kumar jain, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant, is that once the cheques were given by the respondent to the appellant, there was a presumption in law that the dues were payable by the respondent to the appellant. he had pointed out that this is so acknowledged by the high court also in the impugned judgment but has committed an error in law in holding that in spite thereof, it was for the appellant to establish that he had fulfilled its obligation under the agreement and only then presumption under section 139 of the act was available. this is clearly an erroneous approach on the part of the courts below.section 139 of the act reads as under:"139. presumption in favor of holder--it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the nature referred to in section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability."6. once the appellant files a complaint on the basis that he was holding the aforesaid cheques as holder in due course which were admittedly given by the respondent to the appellant and the said cheques were dishonoured when they were presented for encashment to the bank and he, further, is able to establish that due notice of the dishonour of the said cheques was given to the respondent as provided in law, there was a clear presumption in favour of the appellant that the money was due under the said cheques. it may be noted that there is no defence to the effect that the cheques were not issued by the respondent or the cheques do not bear its signatures or they were not presented properly for encashment.7. in the aforesaid circumstances, it was not even necessary for the appellant to produce any document to the effect that it had fulfilled the obligation under the agreement which was entered into between the parties. the case was founded on the dishonour of the two cheques and not on the basis of the said agreement. further, it was not a civil suit which was filed on the basis of the said agreement or any demand was raised for money on the ground that the agreement had been fulfilled. the case is that the payment was not released. it is here where the high court has fell in legal error. we are, therefore, of the opinion that the dishonour of the aforesaid cheques in the aforesaid manner clearly establish that the amount was due to the appellant and it is the respondent which has failed to discharge its obligation. this is more so, when in the legal notice, specific averment was made by the appellant that the appellant had discharged its obligation under the contract and only thereupon, the cheques were issued and the respondent had not even replied to the said notice. we, thus, set aside the orders of the courts below and hold that the respondent has committed an offence in terms of the provisions under section 138 of the act. the respondent shall pay to the appellant the amount due with interest at the rate of 9 per cent from the date of filing of the complaint within two months. if the amount is not paid within the aforesaid period, the respondent shall be liable to pay the appellant double the amount of cheques as well as the interest accrued on the cheques amount.the appeal stands allowed.
s. rajendra babu, j.1. this appeal is filed under section 10(1) of the special court (trial of offences relating to transaction in securities) act, 1992 (hereinafter referred to as 'the act'). a suit had been filed by the standard chartered bank (sc8) against canbank mutual fund (cmf) for refund of a sum of rs. 72.23 crores claiming the same to be due under three sgl transfer forms in government of india security transactions purported to have been undertaken between scb and cmf in august/september 1991. in the course of the written statement cmf took the stand that the transactions were squared off on the basis of documents made available to the appellant before affirming the written statement and tendering evidence.2. the special court held that taking up a false defence as pleaded in the written statement and repeating the same in the evidence in chief amounts to contempt of court and convicted the appellant to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of two weeks and pay fine of rs. 2 thousand. the learned judge in the course of the order held that perjury is contempt and there is a growing tendency amongst parties not to honour their commitments and pay up their dues and liabilities and file any sort of defence irrespective of whether it is true or not; that, therefore, it is for courts to actively curb such tendencies. the special court prima facie felt that the defendant and deponent of written statement were aware that the defence was false at the time when written statements were filed and knowing it to be false took the same and sought to persist with it at the trial. two show cause notices were issued - one under sections 182, 163, 191, 192, 193, 199, 200 and 209 of the indian penal code and another for contempt of court -, however, no action was taken pursuant to the notice issued for offences under the indian penal code and these proceedings stood dropped.3. at the very outset, on behalf of the appellant an unconditional apology was tendered. it was stated that in spite of fact that the appellant had a good answer to the show cause notice the apology was being tendered. however, the special court rejected the apology tendered by the appellant by observing that there is an increasing tendency to first commit the perjury or contempt and, when caught out, tender an unconditional apology and such an apology is not an expression of genuine remorse. in the course of the order, the learned judge noticed as follows:-"in evidence in chief an explanation was sought to be given as to why such averments were made in the written statements. of course, as the explanations themselves showed that the averments in the written statements were based on hearsay evidence the court did not allow the explanations to come on record. the fact remains that in evidence in chief the false statements were sought to be supported. thereafter in cross-examination an attempt was first made to justify the false averments. only when it was found that the falsehood could not be maintained that the truth was admitted."4. though several contentions had been raised before the special court, it is unnecessary to advert to the same. all that we need to examine in this case is whether the defence taken by the appellant would amount to contempt of court.5. in this case, the false statement alleged is as under :-"5(e) on 27th may 1991, the ist defendant, in the course of their investment business, had purchased certain securities being 11.50% goi 2008 securities or the aggregate race value of rs. 58.33 crores from the bank of karad ltd. hiten dalal had acted as a broker in this transaction. the said bank of karad ltd., in order to effect transfer of the said securities to the first defendant issued its combined sgl transfer form authorising the reserve bank of india to operate its sgl account and transfer and assign the said securities to the sgl account of the ist defendant. in consideration of the said securities purchased by the ist defendant, the ist defendant issued their cheque dated 27th may, 1991 bearing no. 160319 in favour of the said bank of karad ltd. for the sum of rs. 58,90,16,042.44 being the cost of the said securities of face value rs. 58.39 crores and the amount of interest accrued thereon up to 27th may 1991.(f) on 29th may, 1991, the ist defendant lodged the said sgl transfer forms for 11.50% goi 2008 securities of face value of rs. 58.39 crores issued by the bank of karad ltd., with reserve bank of india, public debt office, for clearance. on 29th may, 1991, the reference bank of india returned the said sgl transfer form issued by the bank of karad ltd. on account of insufficient balance. on 31st may, 1991, the said sgl transfer form was again presented to the reserve bank of india for clearance but was again returned for want of insufficient balance.(g) the ist defendant thereafter handed over the said sgl transfer form for 11.50% goi 2008 securities of face value rs. 58.39 crores issued by the bank of karad ltd. to the broker hiten dalal sometime in july 1991 for rectification and replacement by a fresh sgl transfer form of the said bank of karad ltd.(h) during the period 1991 august to december 1991, the ist defendant in the course of their investment business, entered into three sale transactions whereunder the 1st defendant sold 11.5% goi 2008 securities to the plaintiffs, particulars whereof are as follows :(i) on 23rd august, 1991, the ist defendant sold 11.50% goi 2008 securities of the aggregate face value rs. 10 crores.(ii) on 26th august 1991, the ist defendant sold 11.50% goi 2008 securities of the aggregate face value of rs. 7 crores.(iii) on 4th september 1991, the ist defendant sold 11.50% goi 2008 securities of the aggregate face value of rs. 43.00 crores.in all the aforesaid three sale transactions hiten dalal had acted as a broker and he had approached the ist defendant with a request to purchase the said securities on behalf of the plaintiffs. in all the aforesaid three sale transactions, hiten dalal and/or his representative had brought the plaintiffs cheque to the ist defendant and had collected for the plaintiffs from the ist defendant the cash memos, along with the transfer forms issued in favour of the plaintiffs.(i) the ist defendant say that the sgl transfer form issued by the bank of karad ltd. for rs. 58.39 crores for 11.50% goi 2008 securities had remained outstanding till december 1991. the let defendant had made enquiries with hiten dalal in respect of the said sgl transfer forms issued by the bank of karad ltd. and which had been returned to hiten dalal in july 1991 for rectification and replacement. on enquiry, hiten dalal informed the ist defendant that since there were sale transactions outstanding for the same security between the plaintiffs and the ist defendant in the sum of rs. 43 crores and rs 10 crores, the ist defendant transactions with the plaintiffs to the extent of rs. 59.39 crores would be squared off and delivery of all the security would be directly transacted and adjusted between the bank of karad ltd and the plaintiffs. he advised the ist defendant, he would directly deliver to the plaintiffs fresh sgl forms for that amount issued by the bank of karad ltd. to the plaintiffs and would return to the ist defendant, three transfer form of rs. 43 crores. rs. 10 crores and rs. 7 crores issued in favour of the plaintiffs and the ist defendant transaction with the bank of karad ltd. and the plaintiffs would stand squared off and ist defendant would remain liable for securities of only the balance of rs. 1.61 crores.(j) accordingly, on 19th december, 1991. hiten dalal brought form and on behalf of the plaintiffs the original sgl transfer form in respect of the 11.50% goi 2008 securities sold to the plaintiffs on 26th august, 1991 (aggregate face value rs. 7 crores) with a request to substitute the said sgl transfer forms with two sgl transfer forms, one dated 19th december 1991 for rs. 58.59 crores and another dated 15th december, 1991 for rs 1.61 crores. the said hiten dalal who had earlier in the day brought the said sgl transfer forms dated 26th august, 1991 for rs. 7 crores from the plaintiffs, took the fresh 2 sgl transfer forms (one dated 19th december 1991 for rs. 1.61 crores) for the plaintiffs from the ist defendant on the same day.(k) on 20th december, 1991, the sgl transfer form for rs. 1.61 crores was presented by the plaintiffs to the reserve bank of india and cleared by effecting transfer of securities of face value of rs. 1.61 crores from the ist defendant sgl account to the plaintiffs sgl account.(l) in the aforesaid circumstances, the aforesaid transactions between the ist defendant and bank of karad ltd. and the ist defendant and the plaintiffs were squared off by hiten dalal in or about december 1991 between the bank of karad ltd. and the plaintiffs. on the ist defendant transactions with the 2 banks having been squared off, the ist defendant obligations under the said three sgl transfer forms dated 4.9.1991 for rs. 43 crores, dated 23,8.1991 for rs. 10 crores and dated 19.12.1991 for rs. 5.39 crores were discharged and there was no liability on part of the ist defendant."6. the appellant took the stand that he was working as divisional manager in charge of systems in the employment of canbank mutual fund; that at the relevant time he was not concerned with transactions of investment; that in june 1993 canbank investment services limited was incorporated to manage the affairs of the canbank mutual fund and that his services were, therefore, transferred to this company initially as a divisional manager and from december 1994 as an assistant general manager; that on receipt of the standard chartered bank's letter dated 19th may, 1992 there appears to have been an internal inquiry by general manager and the chief executive (fund) and enquiries were also made by mr. acharya who was assistant general manager at that time and he submitted a note on 27th may, 1992. further stand of the appellant was that he had been instructed to affirm the written statement on behalf of the trustees and he had no personal knowledge of the transactions and based on the records he verified the statement. the relevant records which the appellant read in order to verify the written statement were -(a) mr. acharya's letter dated 16th june, 1992;(b) plaint in suit no. 31 of 1934;(c) jankiraman's committee report;(d) charge-sheet filed by cbi in case no. rc43(a)/92/acb/bom;(e) a statement recorded by cbi from one mr. manoj rane;(f) two affidavits of mr. hiten dalal7. on the basis that the note of mr. narichania clearly indicated that the defence of squaring off was not correct, the special court concluded that "thus except for canbank's own documents, there is not a single document which shows or supports case of 'squaring off'. on the contrary, all documents of independent parties show that there is no 'squaring off as pleaded' . the special court after adverting to various portions of the evidence further held that the appellant had committed contempt of court. however, when the appellant tried to explain his position in regard to these matters, to which we have adverted to earlier, the same were not allowed to be brought on record on the basis that they are outcome of hearsay.8. the learned additional solicitor general, who appears for the appellant, contended that the learned judge of the special court had gone far beyond the scope of the contempt jurisdiction, particularly when the court held that on the basis of the documents produced by the cmf the stand of the bank had been throughout what had been stated in the written statement, though, with reference to other material that stand may be falsified. he contended that in a case of this nature what is important is that the party verifying the statement or tendering evidence before court should be doing so deliberately and to his knowledge the statement must be false. he drew our attention to the fact that the learned judge had noticed that the stand of the appellant was in conformity with plaint filed in the connected suit by cmf and that suit was yet to be tried at that stage when the order under appeal was passed. subsequently another learned judge who tried the suit of cmf held that the claim in that suit, which is akin to the defence as raised in the present case, is true and correct even after making a reference to the decision in the case out of which the contempt proceeding arises. therefore, in the circumstances of the case, he submitted that when two views are possible on the basis of pleadings raised in a case, the same would not amount to contempt of court at all.9. the written statement had been verified by the appellant that what is contained in written statement is based on the information received from the records of the defendants nos. 2 to 11 and he believed the same to be true. the verification of facts adverted to in the written statement is not made on the basis of personal knowledge of the appellant and the defence set up by him is on the basis of the stand taken by cmf in the companion suit. when in a suit of the cmf the stand had been accepted, but in the suit against cmf such stand had been dis-believed, it becomes difficult to say that the appellant had deliberately stated falsehood to mislead the court or to simply gain time to the disadvantage of the other party in this matter. where a verification is specific and deliberately false, there is nothing in law to prevent a person from being proceeded for contempt. but it must be remembered that the very essence of crimes of this kind is not how such statements may injure this or that party to litigation but how they may deceive and mislead the courts and thus produce mischievous consequences to the administration of civil and criminal justice. a person is under a legal obligation to verify the allegations of fact made in the pleadings and if he verifies falsely, he comes under the clutches of law. in order to expose a person to the liability of a prosecution of making false statement there must be a false statement of fact and not a mere parading made on the basis of facts which are themselves not false. merely because an action or defence can be an abuse of process of the court those responsible for its formulation cannot be regarded as committing contempt, but an attempt to deceive the court by disguising the nature of a claim is contempt. if the facts leading to a claim or defence are set out, but an inference is drawn thereby stating that the stand of the plaintiff or defendant is one way or the other it will not amount to contempt unless it be that the facts as pleaded themselves are false. further, when the appellant tried to explain his case in his evidence, the same was shut out on the basis that it is hearsay. an officer of bank who had no personal knowledge of the transactions in question, and was deposing on the basis of material on record, his evidence cannot be from his knowledge and necessarily has to be hearsay. hence, the learned judge was not justified in shutting out that part of the evidence.10. we, therefore, set aside the order made by the learned judge of the special court initiating the proceedings for contempt and convicting the appellant for the same. the entire proceedings in relation to contempt of court shall stand set aside. the appeal is allowed accordingly.
g.b. pattanaik, s.n. variava and k.g. balakrishnan, jj.1. i. a. for discharge of advocate is allowed.2. these appeals and the special leave petitions are directed against one and the same judgment of the division bench of allahabad high court. the high court disposed of a batch of appeals by a common judgment. the respondents were daily rated wage earners in the forest department having already served the department for several years. they approached the high court for regularization of their services. the division bench of the high court by judgment dated 10th december, 1997 called upon the government to frame a scheme as to how the services of these daily rated workers could be regularised. a committee was directed to be constituted consisting of secretary (finance), secretary (forest) and the legal remembrances or their nominees, which committee was called upon to frame the scheme for regularisation of the daily rated employees working in the forest department. the high court also came to hold that these daily rated workers should be paid at the minimum of the pay-scale that is available for a regular worker in the corresponding post in the government. this court, after issuing notice by order dated 13th of may, 1998, directed maintenance of status quo so far as the payments are concerned. subsequently, on hearing parties after notice, by order dated 3rd of august, 1998 leave was granted and the operation of the impugned judgment was stayed during the pendency of the appeal.3. on behalf of the employees, an i.a. had been filed claiming that they should at least be allowed their regular wages during the pendency of the appeals, but by order dated 27th september, 1999 that prayer was rejected and it was held that the persons working will be paid only the amount payable to a daily-wager. when these matters had been posted for hearing before the court on 1st may, 2001, after hearing the parties for a considerable length of time, the court felt that the impugned direction of the high court for providing a scheme: for regularisation of all the daily-wage workers/muster roll employees under the forest department who have rendered 10 years of service or more, should be regularised by making appropriate scheme. the court directed that the scheme should be framed within three months from the date of the order. as the state of u. p. was bifurcated to two states and state of uttaranchal had come into existence, by a subsequent order, the state of uttaranchal was also impleaded as a party and they had been granted time to file their response. pursuant to the aforesaid direction of the court dated 1.5.2001 the state of u. p. has framed a set of rules in exercise of power conferred under the proviso to article 309 of the constitution called "the uttar pradesh regularization of daily wages appointment on group 'd' posts rules, 2001". it appears that a similar rule has been framed for regularisation of group 'c' daily-wages employees. both these statutory rules would govern the case of all daily-wagers appointed in any department including the forest department, which department was before us pursuant to the direction of the division bench of allahabad high court. since a statutory rule has been framed indicating the manner in which the daily-wagers can be regularised, question of framing any further scheme by the state of uttar pradesh does not arise.4. mr. bahuguna, learned senior counsel appearing for the employees, made a grievance with regard to some of the provisions of the aforesaid rules but we are not inclined to entertain that grievance and issue any direction in this case inasmuch as grievance, if any, emanating from the aforesaid statutory rules would be on a fresh cause of action which could be assailed before an appropriate forum by the aggrieved party. mr. bahuguna, however, contended that so far as the entitlement of these daily-wagers until they are regularised in accordance with the statutory rule to get minimum of the pay-scale, should be granted by this court which is not being given because of the interim order of stay that had been passed by this court and the dismissal of the la. filed by the employees. according to him, a judgment of a learned single judge in respect of the forest employees unequivocally held that the daily-wagers should be paid in the minimum of the pay-scale as is available to a regularly employed worker in the corresponding cadre.5. in several cases, this court, applying the principle of equal pay for equal work has held that a daily-wager, if he is discharging the similar duties as those in the regular employment of the government, should at least be entitled to receive the minimum of the pay-scale though he might not be entitled to any increment or any other allowance that is permissible to his counterpart in the government. in our opinion, that would be the correct position and we, therefore, direct that these daily-wagers would be entitled to draw at the minimum of the pay-scale being received by their counter-part in the government and would not be entitled to any other allowances or increment so long as they continue as daily-wager. the question of their regular absorption will obviously be dealt with in accordance with the statutory rule already referred to.6. so far as the state of uttaranchal is concerned, a scheme for regularisation of daily workers has been produced before us which prima facie does not appear to be objectionable excepting the provision regarding qualification for regularisation. be it stated that the qualification essential for being regularised would be the qualification as was relevant on the date a particular employee was taken in as a daily-wager and not the qualification which is being fixed under the scheme. the fact that the employees have been allowed to continue for so many years indicates the existence or the necessity for having such posts. but still, it would not be open for the court to indicate as to how many posts would be created for the absorption of these daily-wages workers. needless to mention that the appropriate authority will consider the case of these daily-wagers sympathetically who have discharged the duties for all these years to the satisfaction of their authority concerned. so far as the salary is concerned, as we have stated in the case of state of uttar pradesh, a daily-wager in the state of uttaranchal would be also entitled to the minimum of the pay-scale as is available to his counter-part in the government until his services are regularised and he is given regular scale of pay.7. the civil appeals and the special leave petitions stand disposed of accordingly.8. delay condoned and applications for intervention and impleadment stand allowed.
kurian joseph, j.1. leave granted.2. we have heard learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants as well as learned advocate general for the state of haryana.3. the appellants are aggrieved by the rejection of the review application filed before the high court on the ground of delay of 706 days in filing the review application. there is a delay of 1705 days before this court.4. be that as it may, the issues pertain to the claim made by the appellants for enhancement of compensation. the review application was filed before the high court seeking land value at the rate of rs. 16.08 per acre as they are granted to the adjoining property covered by r.f.a. no. 363 of 2005 titled as ram chand @ ram chander (since deceased) through l.r. raghbir singh v. state of haryana and ors. decided on 29.5.2009.5. we also find that this court in all connected cases have set aside the orders passed by the high court and remanded the matters before the high court.6. we are informed, on remand, the high court, has allowed the review application by fixing the compensation at the rate of rs. 16,08,000/- per acre.7. therefore, these appeals are allowed. the appellants shall be entitled to land value fixed at rs. 16,08,000/- per acre. however, the appellants shall not be entitled for any statutory benefits for a period of 2411 days covered by delay before the high court as well as before this court.
arijit pasayat, j.1. leave granted.2. whether promotion has been rightly denied and what is the conceptual difference between the principles of merit-cum-seniority vis-a-vis seniority-cum-merit has been the subject matter of controversy in large number offences. it is not unusual that a person entering into a particular service has an expectation that he will go higher in the hierarchy and denial thereof results invariably in litigation. the case at hand is no exception.3. at the threshold of the litigious history, appellant was working as an administrative officer of the national insurance company limited (hereinafter referred to as 'the employer'). a promotional policy was formulated on 14.2.1990 and is called "promotion policy for officers". it was indicated in clause 3.1 that provisions of this policy are applicable to promotion of officers up to and including the cadre of general manager. appellant was not found suitable for promotion of the relevant periods i.e. 1991-92 and 1992-93. as he was not granted promotion, he filed a representation to the chairman of the managing committee of the employer-company indicating that many of his juniors in the cadre of administrative officer/branch manager had been given promotion which was denied to him. when the representation was rejected for the period 1991-92, and same was the fate for 1992-93, the appellant filed writ petition before the orissa high court. the basic stand in the writ petition was that the appellant had been wrongly denied promotion. during course of hearing of the writ petition, it was contended that the stipulations in clause in para 7.1 of the policy are in variance with those in para 1.2. it was highlighted that promotion was to be granted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit. as 42 marks out of 100 were earmarked for seniority, the principle of seniority-cum-merit was given a go-by and undue stress was placed on merit. strong reliance was placed in the judgment of learned judge of the rajasthan high court in umesh chand pandya v. the new india assurance co. and ors. and upendra kumar pradhan v. the new india assurance co. and ors. delivered on 29.5.1997 consisting identical provision in the policy of the new india assurance company. the employer resisted the claim on the ground that on a reading of the promotional policy and object underlying the same, it is clear that there has been no infraction. it was submitted that basis for promotion was not seniority alone but seniority-cum-merit and other relevant aspects, which are clearly linked and connected with the process of selection for promotion. the high court by the impugned judgment held that the appellant was not entitled to any relief and there was no illegality in the decision-making process of the employer in denying promotion.4. learned counsel for the appellant submitted that para 1.2 makes it clear that the basis for promotion is seniority-cum-merit alone and by allotting 42 marks out of 100, such policy has been overlooked by attaching undue importance to so-called merit. a decision of this court in b.v. shivaiah and ors. v. k. addanki babu and ors., manu/sc/0425/1998manu/sc/0425/1998 : (1999)illj754sc was referred to in order to substantiate the plea.5. in response, mr. mukul rohtagi, learned additional solicitor general submitted that on a reading of the whole policy it is clear that seniority-cum-merit is not the only criteria for granting promotion. para 7.2 itself makes it clear that as one goes higher in the hierarchy of posts seniority has lesser importance, and merit has overriding importance. a reference was made to syndicate bank scheduled castes and scheduled tribes employees association (regd.), through its general secretary, k.s. badlia and ors. v. union of india, through its additional secretary, ministry of finance (deptt. of economic affairs), banking division and ors. manu/sc/0558/1990manu/sc/0558/1990 : (1990)iillj354sc to contend that where seniority-cum-merit and all other relevant aspects have been duly taken note of there is no scope for making a grievance. it pointed out that in the writ petition there was no challenge to the policy or its efficacy and, only during argument probably sustenance was drawn from the rajasthan high court's judgment and plea regarding the legality of para 7.2 was raised. it is also highlighted that the policy is in operation of more than a decade, and even without impleading a single officer who has been promoted on the basis of para 7.2, the writ petition was misconceived.6. in all services, whether public or private there is invariably a hierarchy of posts comprising of higher posts and lower posts. promotion, as understood under the service law jurisprudence, is advancement in rank, grade or both and no employee has right to be promoted, but has a right to be considered for promotion. the following observations in sant ram sharma v. state of rajasthan and ors. manu/sc/0330/1967manu/sc/0330/1967 : (1968)iillj830sc are significant:"the question of a proper promotion policy depends on various conflicting factors. it is obvious that the only method in which absolute objectivity can be ensured is for all promotions to be made entirely on grounds of seniority. that means that if a post falls vacant it is filed by the person who has served longest in the post immediately below. but the trouble with the seniority system is that it is so objective that it fails to take any account of personal merit. as a system it is fair to every official except the best ones; an official has nothing to win or loss provided he does not actually become so inefficient that disciplinary action has to be taken against him. but, though the system is fair to the officials concerned, it is a heavy burden on the public and a great strain on the efficient handling of public business. the problem, therefore, is how to ensure reasonable prospect of advancement to all officials and at the same time to protect the public interest in having posts filled by the most able man? in other words, the question is now to find a correct balance between seniority and merit in a proper promotion-policy."7. the principles of seniority-cum-merit and merit-cum-seniority are conceptually different. for the former, greater emphasis is laid in seniority, though it is not the determinative factor, while in the latter merit is the determinative factor. in the state of mysore and anr. v. syed mahamood and ors. manu/sc/0162/1968manu/sc/0162/1968 : (1970)illj370sc , it was observed that in the background of rule 4(3)(b) of the mysore state civil services (general recruitment) rules, 1957 which required promotion to be made by selection on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, that the rule required promotion to be made by selection on the basis of "seniority subject to fitness of the candidate to discharge the duties of the post from among persons eligible for promotion". it was pointed out that where the promotion is based on seniority-cum-merit the officer cannot claim promotion as a matter of right by virtue of his seniority alone and if he is found unfit to discharge the duties of the higher post, he may be passed over and an officer junior to him nay be promoted. but these are not the only modes for deciding whether promotion is to be granted or not.8. before we analyse the legal position further, it would be appropriate to extract some of the relevant paragraphs of the promotion policy."1.1 the main objective is to rationalise and codify the existing guidelines relating to promotions within the officers cadre (class i) and to formulate a well defined promotion policy with built in motivation, providing therein reasonable opportunities to officers to move up in hierarchy, keeping in view the legitimate aspirations of the officers to shoulder higher responsibilities.1.2 this is aimed to be achieved by providing for promotion of officers through a process of selection on the basis of their seniority-cum-merit. while seniority is a known fact depending upon the number of years of service put in, merit, would inter-alia comprise of job knowledge, past performance, suitability and growth potential. these are to be assessed on the basis of performance appraisal system. suitability and growth potential can be assessed from recommendations and remarks of officers in the appraisals and interviews, were applicable.7. criteria for promotion and weightage:7.1 selection for promotion shall be based on seniority, insurance qualifications and merit-cum-seniority potential, as brought out in performance appraisals. in addition, for promotion to the cadre of manager there shall be interview before selection. in assessment, maximum weightage in terms of numerical marks for various criteria shall be worked out as under:a.a.o.	a.o.	a.m.	dy. managerto	to	to	toa.o.	a.m	dy.m.	managera) seniority.	60	42	30	20b) insurancequalification	10	8	-c) c.r. formi) traits in c.r.	10	15	20	15ii) performance	10	15	25	25iii) growth potential	10	20	25	25d) interview	-	-	-	13total	100	100	100	100note: marks for insurance qualification shall come into effect for promotion exercise for 1992 and onwards. till then total marks 'for a, a.o, to a.o and a.o, to a.m. shall be 90 to 92 respectively."9. as the figurative data extracted from the policy goes to show the service structure is like a pyramid. the higher one goes in the ladder of promotional posts remarkably the seniority loses importance, and merit gets primacy.10. in syndicate bank case (supra) observations in para 14 throw considerable light on the controversy. the third mode (apart from seniority-cum-merit and merit-cum-seniority modes) has been recognized. it has been described as a "hybrid mode of promotion". in other words, there is a third category of cases where seniority is duly respected and merit is appropriately recognized.11. while laying down the promotion policy or rule, it is always open to the employer to specify area and parameter of weightage to be given in respect of merit and seniority separately so long as policy is not colourable exercise of power, or has the effect of violating of any statutorily scope of interference and other relatable. the decision in b.v. shivaiah case (supra) is clearly distinguishable on facts and in law. that was a case where statutory rules governed the field. this court, inter alia, held that fixing terms which are at variance with the statutory rules is impermissible. in the case at hand, prior to the formulation of policy in february, 1990, there were no codified prescriptions. it was the stand of the respondent-employer that prior to the formulation of the policy, certain guidelines existed and the objectives of the policy were to rationalize and codify the existing guidelines relating to promotions within officers cadre. there is no statutory rule operating. it is for the employer to stipulate the criteria for promotion, the same pertaining really to the area of policy making. it was, therefore, permissible for the respondent to have their own criteria for adjudging claims on the principle of seniority-cum-merit giving primacy to merit as well, depending upon the class, category and nature of posts in the hierarchy of administration and the requirements of efficiency for such posts.12. reading of the whole policy reveals that stress was not on seniority alone and weightage was sought to be imposed on merit and other relevant aspects also. in view of this conclusion it is not necessary to go into the question of fence-sitting stand adopted by the appellant and non-impletion of affected persons. there is no scope for interference in this appeal, which is accordingly dismissed. costs made easy.
1. all the applications for intervention stand allowed. heard learned counsel for the parties and the intervenors, mr. dushyant dave, learned senior counsel, the amicus curiae, engaged in writ petition (c) no. 599 of 2015 [anupam trivathi v. union of india and ors.].2. though this matter was to be finally heard today, yet due to paucity of time, it has not been finally taken up for hearing for the purpose of final disposal. that apart, number of issues have also cropped up including the defensibility of the judgment and orders passed by the high courts of bombay, kerala and karnataka. we have been apprised that initially in 2006, the kerala high court had passed a judgment dismissing the writ petition, which was filed for protection of the stray dogs. recently, another division bench has passed a judgment on 4th november, 2015, taking the view that the animal birth control rules, 2001, (for short, 'the 2001 rules') shall prevail over the provisions contained in kerala municipality act, 1994 and the kerala panchayat act, 1994.3. it is submitted by mr. shekhar naphade, learned senior counsel appearing for the bombay municipal corporation that the legislation passed by the state of maharashtra forming the subject matter of bombay municipal corporation act, 1888, as amended by section 191-ba-control and other provisions relating to dogs in the year 1975, shall withstand the test of repugnancy if challenged as there was assent from the president of india under article 200 of the constitution. be that as it may, we do not intend to enter into the said debate today.4. there can be no trace of doubt that there has to be compassion for dogs and they should not be killed in an indiscriminate manner, but indubitably the lives of the human beings are to be saved and one should not suffer due to dog bite because of administrative lapse.5. in course of hearing, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners, except the animal welfare board, would pyramid their case on the plinth and foundation that the dogs, who have various uses for human society and have served the society for centuries and also have constitutional protection under article 51a of the constitution of india and the laws made, have to be taken care of. the resistance from the other side is that a bite by a stray dog creates menace in the society and in the name of compassion for dogs, the lives of human beings cannot be sacrificed.6. mr. raj panjwani, learned senior counsel appearing for the animal welfare board, supported by mr. c.a. sundaram, learned senior counsel in that regard, would submit that the legislation by the parliament has struck a balance by legislating the prevention of cruelty to animals act, 1960, (for short, 'the 1960 act') and the 2001 rules.7. mr. dushyant dave, learned senior counsel, who has been appointed as amicus curiae, has interestingly produced certain writings on the stray dogs by mahatma gandhi, the father of the nation. he has drawn our attention to various paragraphs, but we shall refer to the same at the time of final disposal. the said write-up be kept on record.8. for the purpose of certain interim order, we have to prima facie understand the provisions of the 1960 act. section 2(b) of the said act defines the "board" which is established under section 4 and reconstituted from time to time under section 5a. section 2(e) defines "local authority" which means a municipal committee, district board or other authority for the time being invested by law with the control and administration of any matters within a specified local area. section 9 deals with the functions of the board. the said provision reads as under:functions of the board: the functions of the board shall be board(a) to keep the law in force in, india for the prevention of cruelty to animals under constant study and advise the government on the amendments to be undertaken in any such law from time to time;(b) to advise the central government on the making of rules under this act with a view to preventing unnecessary pain or suffering to animals generally, and more particularly when they are being transported from one place to another or when they are used as performing animals or when they are kept in captivity or confinement;(c) to advise the government or any local authority or other person on improvements in the design of vehicles so as to lessen the burden on draught animals;(d) to take all such steps as the board may think fit for 11 (amelioration of animals) by encouraging or providing for, the construction of sheds, water-troughs and the like and by providing for veterinary assistance to animals:(e) to advise the government or any local authority or other person in the design of slaughter-houses or the maintenance of slaughter houses or in connection with slaughter of animals so that unnecessary pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is eliminated in the pre-slaughter stages as far as possible, and animals are killed; wherever necessary, in as humane a manner as possible;(f) to take all such steps as the board may think fit to ensure that unwanted animals are destroyed by local authorities, whenever it is necessary to do so, either instantaneously or after being rendered insensible to pain or suffering.(g) to encourage by the grant of financial assistance or otherwise, 12 (the formation or establishment of pinjrapoles, rescue homes, animal shelters, sanctuaries and the like) where animals and birds may find a shelter when they have become old and useless or when they need protection;(h) to co-operate with, and co-ordinate the work of, associations or bodies established for the purpose of preventing unnecessary pain or suffering to animals or for the protection of animals and birds;(i) to give financial and other assistance to animal welfare organisations functioning in any local area or to encourage the formation of animal welfare organisations in any local area which shall work under the general supervision and guidance of the board;(j) to advise the government on matters relating to the medical care and attention which may be provided in animal hospital, and to give financial and other assistance to animal hospitals whenever the board thinks it necessary to do so;(k) to impart education in relation to the humane treatment of animals and to encourage the formation of public opinion against the infliction of unnecessary pain - or suffering to animals and for the promotion of animal welfare by means of lectures, books, posters, cinematographic exhibitions and the like;(l) to advise the government on any matter connected with animal welfare or the prevention of infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on animals.(underlining is ours)"9. we have emphasized on clause (f) as it empowers the board to ensure that unwanted animals are destroyed by local authorities, wherever it is necessary to do so, either instantaneously or after being rendered insensible to pain of suffering. the significant words are "the board has to form an opinion".10. section 11 deals with treating animals cruelly. section 12 provides for penalty of practising phooka or doom dev. section 13 of the act deals with destruction of suffering animals. the said provision is reproduced below:13. destruction of suffering animals.- (1) where the owner of an animal is convicted of an offence under section 11, it shall be lawful for the court, if the court is satisfied that it would be cruel to keep the animal alive, to direct that the animal be destroyed and to assign the animals to any suitable person for that purpose, and the person to whom such animal is so assigned shall as soon as possible, destroy such animal or cause such animal to be destroyed in his presence without unnecessary suffering: and any reasonable expense incurred in destroying the animal may be ordered by the court, if the court is satisfied that it would be cruel to keep the animal alive, to direct that the animal be destroyed and to assign the animal to any reasonable expense incurred in destroying the animal be ordered by the court to be recovered from the owner as if it were a fine:provided that unless the owner assents thereto, no order shall be made under this section except upon the evidence of a veterinary officer in charge of the area.(2) when any magistrate, commissioner of police or district superintendent of police has reason to believe that an offence under section 11 has been committed in respect of any animal, he may direct the immediate destruction of the animal, if in his opinion, it would be cruel to keep the animal alive.(3) any police officer above the rank of a constable or any person authorised by the state government in this behalf who finds any animal so diseased or so severely injured or in such a physical condition that in his opinion it cannot be removed without cruelty, may, if the owner is absent or refuses his consent to the destruction of the animal, forth with summon the veterinary officer in charge of the area in which the animal is found, and if the veterinary officer certifies that the animal is mortally injured or so severely injured or in such a physical condition that it would be cruel to keep it alive, the police officer or the person authorised, as the case may be, may, after obtaining orders from a magistrate, destroy the animal injured or cause it to be destroyed; 22 (in such manner as may be prescribed).(4) no appeal shall lie from any order of a magistrate for the destruction of an animal.11. section 38 provides for power to make rules. in exercise of power under sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 38 of the 1960 act, the 2001 rules, have been framed. rule 2(c) of the rules mentions about the "board" and gives the same colour and character as in section 4 of the 1960 act. the said rule reads as follows:"board" means the animal welfare board of india, established under section 4 and as reconstituted under section 5a of the act.12. rule 4 deals with formation of committee and rule 5 deals with the functions of the committee. the said rule being relevant, is reproduced below:5. functions of the committee.- the committee constituted under rule 4 shall be responsible for planning and management of dog control programme in accordance with these rules. the committee may:(a) issue instructions for catching, transportation, sheltering, sterilisation, vaccination, treatment and release of sterilized vaccinated or treated dogs.(b) authorize veterinary doctor to decide on case to case basis the need to put to sleep critically ill or fatally injured or rabid dogs in a painless method by using sodium pentothal. any other method is strictly prohibited.(c) create public awareness, solicit cooperation and funding.(d) provide guidelines to pet dog owners and commercial breeders from time to time.(e) get a survey done of the number of street dogs by an independent agency.(f) take such steps for monitoring the dog bite cases to ascertain the reasons of dog bite, the area where it took place and whether it was from a stray or a pet dog.(g) keep a watch on the national and international development in the field of research pertaining to street dogs' control and management, development of vaccines and cost effective methods of sterilization, vaccination, etc.(h) the activities of the committee shall be brought to the public notice by announcements and advertisements."13. rule 6 provides for obligations of the local authority. rule 7 deals with capturing/sterilisation/immunisation/release. rule 8 deals with identification and recording and rule 9 provides for euthanasia of street dogs. rule 10 deals with furious or dumb rabid dogs.14. as we find, the local authorities have a sacrosanct duty to provide sufficient number of dog pounds, including animal kennels/shelters, which may be managed by the animal welfare organizations, that apart, it is also incumbent upon the local authorities to provide requisite number of dog vans with ramps for the capture and transportation of street dogs; one driver and two trained dog catchers for each dog van; an ambulance-cum-clinical van as mobile centre for sterilization and immunisation; incinerators for disposal of carcasses and periodic repair of shelter or pound.15. rule 7 has its own significance. the procedure has to be followed before any steps are taken. rules 9 and 10 take care of the dogs which are desirable to be euthanised.16. we may note with profit that mr. shekhar naphade, learned senior counsel appearing for the bombay municipal corporation would contend with vehemence that the corporation has a duty under the act to remove the dogs that create nuisance. as stated earlier, we will advert to the same at a later stage, but for the present it is suffice to say that all the state municipal corporations, municipal committees, district boards and local bodies shall be guided by the act and the rules and it is the duty and obligation of the animal welfare board to see that they are followed with all seriousness. it is also the duty of all the municipal corporations to provide infrastructure as mandated in the statute and the rules. once that is done, we are disposed to think for the present that a balance between compassion to dogs and the lives of human being, which is appositely called a glorious gift of nature, may harmoniously co-exist.17. learned counsel appearing for both the sides are at liberty to file affidavits which may contain the data of the dog bites and the steps taken by the local bodies with regard to destruction/removal of the stray dogs. they are also at liberty to file data pertaining to population of stray dogs. the local authorities shall file affidavits including what kind of infrastructures they have provided, as required under the law. needless to emphasize, no innovative method or subterfuge should be adopted not to carry out the responsibility under the 1960 act or the 2001 rules. any kind of laxity while carrying out statutory obligations, is not countenanced in law.18. a copy of the order passed today be sent to the chief secretary of each of the states and the competent authority of union territories, so that they can follow the same in letter and spirit.19. we would also request all the high courts not to pass any order relating to the 1960 act and the 2001 rules pertaining to dogs. needless to say, all concerned as mentioned herein-above, shall carry out this order and file their respective affidavits as directed. let the matter be listed on 9th march, 2016.
v. gopala gowda, j.1. leave granted.2. this appeal is filed by the appellants against the impugned judgment and order dated 23.02.2015, passed in criminal appeal no. 101 of 2010, by the high court of judicature of gujarat at ahmedabad, wherein the high court has dismissed the appeal of the appellants and upheld the order of conviction and sentence of the appellants under sections 498a and 306 read with section 114 of the indian penal code, 1860 (in short "i.p.c.") passed by the fast track court, veraval, camp una, in sessions case no. 9 of 2007 (hereinafter "the trial court") in its judgment and order dated 21.11.2009. the appellants have prayed to set aside the same and quash the criminal proceedings initiated against them by the respondent-state, urging various legal grounds.3. the brief facts of the case are stated hereunder to appreciate the rival legal contentions urged on behalf of the parties:the appellant nos. 1 and 2 are the mother-in-law and the sister-in-law of the deceased respectively. it is the case of the prosecution that the deceased was residing with her husband and in-laws in a joint family at kodinar with a minor daughter. however, within 2 years of marriage, the deceased was allegedly tortured by her husband and her in-laws for not bringing dowry and not working properly. the deceased was also allegedly driven out of her matrimonial home and was forced to stay at kanta stri vikas gruh at rajkot.4. the deceased informed the complainant, who is her paternal uncle about the harassment and that her husband and in-laws were demanding an amount of rs. 20,000/- from her. the maternal uncle of the deceased persuaded her to compromise with her in-laws and sent her back to her matrimonial home. thereafter, the deceased was kept well for a month but she was later allegedly beaten up and driven out of her matrimonial home. a case was registered against them before the amreli nari surakhsha gruh. after 2 months, the husband and the father-in-law of the deceased brought her back after making a settlement. after a month of her return to her matrimonial home, the deceased was again allegedly beaten up and thrown out of her home. the deceased then filed a complaint against her in-laws before the babra police station and a maintenance application was filed before the babra court. the husband of the deceased brought her back home again after making a settlement before the court but she was again allegedly beaten up by her in-laws against which she filed a case before the amreli mahila vikas gruh, where her maintenance was fixed at rs. 1,000/- p.m. but the same was not paid by her husband.5. the deceased then stayed at the gondal bala ashram (orphanage) and from there she again went back to her in-laws place at kodinar to meet her daughter whose custody was with her husband as part of a compromise between herself and the accused. it is further the case of the prosecution that on 12.11.2006 at about 11.30 hours when the complainant was on his way to work he received an information that the deceased had consumed poison and later came to know through his daughter that the deceased had passed away.6. the complainant then filed a complaint being i.c.r. no. 172 of 2006 before the kodinar police station against the appellants and the husband of the deceased. thereafter, further investigation was carried out, the panchanama of the scene was drawn, the statements of the witnesses were recorded and the accused were arrested.7. the learned trial court after recording the evidence of prosecution witnesses and on perusal of the dying declaration of the deceased and on consideration of the same, convicted and sentenced the present appellants and the husband of the deceased for the offences punishable under sections 498a and 306 read with section 114 of indian penal code the accused were to undergo 3 years of rigorous imprisonment with a fine of rs. 5000/- and in default, further simple imprisonment of six months for the offences punishable under sections 498a and 114 of the indian penal code for offences punishable under sections 306 and 114 of the indian penal code the accused were ordered to undergo 10 years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of rs. 12,000/- each and in default, further simple imprisonment of one year. the accused were acquitted for the offences punishable under section 304b read with section 114 of the indian penal code and section 4 of the dowry prohibition act, 1961.8. being aggrieved by the same the accused filed an appeal before the high court of gujarat which dismissed the same holding that it has been well established that the accused have instigated the deceased and thereby they abetted the deceased in committing suicide. the high court further held that the accused and his family members caused mental and physical cruelty and therefore, the deceased was put in a critical condition and consumed poison and ended her life. it further held that on perusal of the findings recorded by the trial court it was impossible that the deceased could have consumed poison by mistake and therefore, the learned trial court has rightly convicted the accused as they are guilty of the above mentioned offences. the high court has thus upheld the order of conviction and sentence passed by the trial court against all the accused persons. it is stated that the husband of the deceased has already undergone the period of sentences passed against him and has been released from jail. the present appeal has been filed by the appellants-the mother-in-law and the sister-in-law of the deceased praying to set aside their conviction and sentence and for their enlargement on bail.9. it has been contended by the learned counsel on behalf of the appellants that the guilt or even the involvement of the appellants in the commission of the offence has not been rightly pointed out by the courts below as there are no independent evidence/witnesses against them. thus, the case against the appellants has not been proved beyond reasonable doubt.10. it has been further contended by him that the trial court did not find any incriminating material evidence against the accused so as to punish them under the aforementioned offences. in the present matter, the only evidence adduced before the courts below was the deposition of the relatives of the deceased and no independent witnesses were examined. he has further submitted that as per the provisions under section 113(a) of the indian evidence act, 1872, the abetment on the part of the accused has not been proved by the prosecution.11. he has further contended that the courts below have not considered the dying declaration of the deceased and the deposition made by the doctor who had examined her that were recorded by the executive magistrate do not mention any allegation against the accused.12. on the other hand, it has been contended by ms. hemantika wahi, the learned counsel on behalf of the respondent that the trial court and the high court after appreciating the evidence on record and the submissions made on behalf of the parties have rightly convicted and sentenced the accused for the afore-mentioned offences.13. she has submitted that the ingredients under sections 498a, 306 and 304b of indian penal code are established beyond all reasonable doubt against the accused. she has further submitted that from the evidence of the witnesses, it has been clearly established that the appellants were mentally and physically harassing the deceased and even had driven her out of her matrimonial house several times.14. she has further submitted that the presumption as to the abetment of suicide as per section 113a of the indian evidence act, 1872, has been clearly proved and the appellants are responsible for abetting her in the commission of suicide which is the concurrent finding on fact and the appellants have not made out a case for interference of this court.15. on the basis of the rival legal contentions urged on behalf of the parties and the evidence on record, the following questions would arise for our consideration:1) whether, the courts below have rightly convicted and sentenced the accused for the offences punishable under sections 498a and 306 read with section 114 of indian penal code?2) what order?16. before arriving at an irrefutable conclusion, we have to first determine as to whether the deceased was tortured and meted with cruelty by the accused or not? to find out the same, we have perused the evidence placed on record by the prosecution viz., the deposition of witnesses and the dying declaration of the deceased.17. it is an undisputed fact that the deceased was frequently taking refuge at kanta stri vikas gruh, rajkot, mahila vikas gruh and gondal bala ashram. it is also an undisputed fact that her paternal relatives had pacified her many a times and she was sent back to her in laws' home after compromise. the same has been proved by the deposition of pw-6 paternal uncle of the deceased at exh. 69 before the trial court and pw-7-the wife of pw-6 and pw-9-the brother of the deceased. the same has also been further corroborated by pw-19 who is a social worker at amreli mahila vikas gruh at exh. 135. it is also an undisputed fact that the deceased had filed a complaint against the accused for maintenance, which was not paid to her by her husband. she had also filed an fir against the accused on 14.02.2006 under sections 498a, 506(2), 114 of indian penal code and sections 3 and 7 of the dowry prohibition act, 1961. on several occasions after the compromise, the deceased was again thrown out of her matrimonial home. the abovementioned witnesses have also stated that the deceased was regularly taunted and mentally and physically harassed by the accused and she had complained about the same to the above mentioned witnesses.18. it has also been deposed before the trial court by several other independent witnesses who are the neighbours of the accused and live in the same vicinity that they had witnessed heated exchanges and quarrel between the accused and the deceased which has been corroborated by ravibhai dodia (pw-8) in his testimony at exh. 80 before the trial court. further, another independent witness, smt. savitaben (pw-10), has also deposed before the trial court at exh. 84 that the deceased had sat on "otla" of her house for 2 consecutive days as the accused had locked up their house and gone somewhere and came back only when they received a call from their neighbours about the deceased sitting there. it has also been noticed that the deceased had spent several days sleeping at odd places like, empty buses, etc. as she had nowhere else to go.19. further, the deposition of the witness hirakumar kanabhai gohil (pw-12) in his testimony at exh. 95 had stated before the trial court that the deceased was loitering outside his street and had asked for his help, thereby claiming that her husband and in-laws were trying to kill her and that is why she had run away from their home. she also had burn marks branded on her hands. therefore, he had helped her and paid her an amount of rs. 200/- for the bus fare. we have also taken note of the fact that the mother-in-law ignored the pleas of the deceased by calling her act as "epileptic fits" when the deceased had come running out of her house and was calling out to her for help on the day of the unfortunate incidence.20. there is no other material evidence or fact brought before this court to show that the deposition of the above mentioned witness is unreliable and this court has no reason to believe the same to annul the finding of conviction on the charge against the appellants. therefore, in the light of the above mentioned depositions made and based on the facts and circumstances of the case, it has been aptly held by the courts below that the prosecution has established by adducing cogent and convincing evidence that the deceased had been tortured by her in-laws and her husband. the reason that the deceased kept coming back to her matrimonial home by way of compromise in spite of all the cruelty and torture meted against her is because of her minor daughter who was living with her husband. thus, the ingredients to constitute the offence under the provision of section 498a of indian penal code have been fully satisfied in the present case against the appellants. the relevant provisions of section 498a read thus:498a. husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.--whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine. explanation.--for the purpose of this section, "cruelty" means--(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet such demand.21. the deceased was subjected to cruelty at the hands of her husband and her in-laws and the evidence of the prosecution witnesses and the circumstantial evidence makes it amply clear that she was harassed beyond limits by her in-laws, which had caused her grave mental and physical injury. the same had made her run away from matrimonial home on several times and had ultimately resulted in her death. on the issue that the above mentioned witnesses are interested witnesses and their evidence cannot be accepted by this court as contended by the learned counsel on behalf of the appellants is also rejected in the light of the decision of this court in the case of vishwanath agrawal v. sarla vishwanath agrawal manu/sc/0513/2012manu/sc/0513/2012 : (2012) 7 scc 288., wherein this court has held thus:39. ...in a matrimonial dispute, it would be inappropriate to expect outsiders to come and depose. the family members and sometimes the relatives, friends and neighbours are the most natural witnesses.the veracity of the testimony is to be tested on objective parameters and not to be thrown overboard on the ground that the witnesses are related to either of the spouse. exception has been taken by the courts below that the servants of the house should have been examined and that amounts to suppression of the best possible evidence....22. now, coming to the point of determining whether the accused had abetted in the commission of suicide of the deceased as provided under section 306 of indian penal code, the same cannot be proved with conclusive evidence in the light of the fact that the deceased in her dying declaration had clearly stated that she had consumed the poisonous tablets by mistake. the same was further corroborated by the doctor who had examined her and had declared her as stable and conscious enough to give a reasonable statement. reliance has also been placed upon the decision of this court in the case of bhola turha v. state of bihar manu/sc/1411/1998manu/sc/1411/1998 : (1998) 9 scc 15, wherein this court has held thus:2. the conviction of the appellant is based solely upon the dying declaration. it has been found to be reliable. it was made by the deceased within about two hours from the incident and a few hours before his death. in his dying declaration, he has clearly explained how he came to be injured by the appellant. after carefully scrutinising the dying declaration, both the courts have come to the conclusion that it contains a truthful version as regards the manner in which the injuries were caused to him.23. further, the accused were present inside the house at the time the deceased consumed the poisonous tablet and they had taken her to the hospital as soon as they realized that she was in a critical condition. thus, even though the cruelty aspect meted on the deceased has been proved beyond all reasonable doubt, it cannot be said that the same had lead her to commit suicide or that the accused had abetted in the commission of the same, as is clear from the facts and circumstances of the present case. the appellant no. 1 herein even though had behaved stoically in the beginning by calling the act of the deceased as "epileptic fit", but as soon as she realized the gravity of the situation she called her son and they took her to the hospital for examination and treatment. this act of the accused clearly shows that they did not abet the deceased in the commission of the suicide, if at all it was a suicide.24. from the facts and circumstances of the present case and upon the examination of the body of deceased, it is clear that her death was a result of an accident and she had mistakenly consumed the poisonous tablet as the same was kept with other medicines. had the deceased wanted to implicate the accused, she would have revealed their names in the final moments before her death, as she had nothing to fear for and her antecedent showed that she had previously filed a complaint against the accused when they harassed her. if the accused had any hand in her death, the same would have been revealed in the dying declaration of the deceased. thus, the prosecution has failed to prove beyond all reasonable doubt that the accused had abetted the deceased in the commission of suicide as provided under the provision of section 306, indian penal code.25. in view of the above observations made, it is amply clear that even though the accused had tortured and harassed the deceased because of which she was constantly running away from her matrimonial home and had also filed a number of complaints against the accused, the same cannot be said to be the reason for her death in the light of the facts and circumstances of the present case and the dying declaration made by her.26. the learned counsel for the appellants has placed reliance upon the decision of this court reported in the case of ramesh kumar v. state of chhattisgarh manu/sc/0654/2001manu/sc/0654/2001 : (2001) 9 scc 618 at paragraph 22 wherein it is held that sections 498a and 306 indian penal code are independent and constitute different offences. merely because an accused has been held liable to be punished under section 498a indian penal code, it does not follow that on the same evidence, he must also and necessarily be held guilty of having abetted the commission of suicide by the women concerned under 306 indian penal code. therefore, the conviction and sentence for offence punishable under section 306 read with section 114 of the indian penal code of the present appellants is contrary to the legal evidence on record particularly, the dying declaration of the deceased and the conduct of the accused who took the deceased to the hospital. this fact has been grossly ignored by the courts below while convicting and sentencing the appellants for the aforesaid offences. therefore, the conviction and sentence for the aforesaid offence is erroneous and accordingly it is liable to be set aside.27. after evaluation of evidence on record and concurrent finding of fact recorded by the trial court and the appellate court, the appellants were convicted for the offences punishable under section 498a and 306 read with section 114 of indian penal code the accused were acquitted for the offences punishable under section 304b read with section 114 of indian penal code and section 4 of the dowry prohibition act, 1961 as they did not find any evidence on record to bring home the guilt of appellants for the offences punishable under section 306 as there is no cogent evidence in this regard in the finding of fact. therefore, the conviction and sentence for the offence punishable under section 498a of indian penal code with regard to cruelty is held to be proved by the courts below. the same is accepted by us and they are required to be convicted and sentenced for the offence punishable under section 498a, indian penal code the conviction and sentence passed by the high court for the offence punishable under section 306 read with section 114 of indian penal code is liable to be set aside, accordingly, we set aside the same.28. since, we have upheld the conviction for the offence punishable under section 498a indian penal code, it is to be carefully examined by us taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of the case as to what sentence is required to be imposed upon the appellants. keeping in view the age of the appellants i.e. the appellant no. 1-mother-in-law of the deceased who is said to be around 60 years of age and appellant no. 2-sister-in-law of the deceased who is more than 35 years of age and having a child to take care of, we deem it fit and proper to limit the sentence to the period of imprisonment already undergone by them.29. we partly set aside the impugned judgment and order dated 23.02.2015 of the high court of gujarat at ahmedabad in criminal appeal no. 101 of 2010.we confirm the conviction on the charge under section 498a of indian penal code and having regard to the facts and circumstances referred to above we direct that the period already undergone by the appellants in custody is the sentence. we modify and reduce the sentence to the period of imprisonment already undergone by them.30. since, we have stated that period already undergone is the sentence which we have modified in this judgment for the conviction under section 498a of the indian penal code and in pursuant to the impugned judgment and order of the high court, the appellants have surrendered to undergo the imprisonment. presently, they are undergoing sentence imposed by the high court and therefore, we direct the jail superintendent, rajkot central prison, rajkot, gujarat to release them forthwith, if not required in connection with any other criminal case.31. accordingly, the appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent.
s.n. variava, j.1. the facts relevant for the purposes of this writ petition are as follows:the state of andhra pradesh established family courts and mahila courts. the high court of andhra pradesh desired that these courts be manned by women. however in the cadre of district and sessions judges, grade ii there were not enough women judges who could be posted in these courts. therefore the high court requested the state to create additional posts. on 3rd september, 1996 the state government issued office memorandum no. 172 sanctioning 10 additional posts of district and sessions judges, grade ii. the relevant portion of the said memorandum reads as follows:"the registrar, high court of andhra pradesh, hyderabad, has informed in his letter 6th read above that six family courts in the cadre of district and sessions judge were sanctioned at visakhapatnam , hyderabad, vijayawada, kurnool, tirupathi and warangal in the g.o. 3rd read above and another family court at secunderabad was sanctioned in the g.o. 5th read above. the registrar, high court of andhra pradesh has further stated that the high court considers it necessary to post lady district judges to preside over the family courts in the state with a view to protect and preserve that institution of marriage and to promote the welfare of the children as stipulated in rule 4 (4) (a) and (b) of the family court act, 1984, but due to non availability of women judicial officers in the cadre of district judges, the high court, is unable to post lady district judges to the family courts. the registrar has also stated that mahila courts with lady presiding officer at hyderabad, vijayawada and visakhapatnam were sanctioned exclusively to deal with offences against women, in the g.os. first and fourth read above. the registrar, high court of andhra pradesh has finally requested that 10 posts of district and sessions judge, grade-ii, be sanctioned in addition to the existing cadre strength, exclusively to recruit the women candidates by direct recruitment, for being posted to the family courts and mahila courts in the state.2. government after careful consideration of the matter hereby sanction in relaxation of rule 2 of the special rules for the a.p. state higher judicial service, 10 posts of district and sessions judges, grade-ii, in addition to the existing cadre strength, exclusively for women candidates to be recruited by direct recruitment."2. pursuant to this memorandum the high court issued an advertisement inviting applications from women candidates for appointment to the post of district and sessions judge, grade-ii. the advertisement specified that five posts would be available for open competition, two posts for the scheduled castes, one post for the scheduled tribe, one post for backward class group a and one post for backward class group b.3. pursuant to this advertisement 261 candidates applied for the posts. the high court called 210 candidates for a written examination. 180 candidates participated in the written examination. the high court called 35 candidates for oral interviews. the oral interviews were conducted on 20th and 21st of march, 1997. a panel of 10 candidates was prepared. the 10 candidates were asked for furnish further information relating to their legal practice. after receipt of the information the high court rejected one name. a panel of nine candidates was the approved at full court meeting held on 17th september, 1997 and again on 17th october, 1997. this panel consisted of seven candidates from the open category, one from scheduled caste and one from backward class group d. the high court then sent the names of the nine candidates to the state government for appointment.4. the state government brought to the notice of the high court certain aspects and requested the high court to consider the same and express its views. the aspects brought to the notice of the high court were as follows:"1. as rule 22 of the a.p. state and subordinate service rules old or new prescribes a specific procedure either for filling of s.c. and s.t. vacancies with o.c. candidates or for de-reserving such vacancies, it is for the consideration whether the 7th and 8th vacancies int he recruitment reserved for scs and sts respectively can straightaway be de- reserved which is not in consonance with the said rule 22.2. as the notification inviting the applications for the post in question was issued much later to 18-3-1996, the principles of carry forward of vacancies in respect of bcs also applies to the recruitment. the recommendation of the high court at roster points 4th and 10th reserved for bc.a and bc.b groups respectively, required consideration in the light of rules issued in g.o.ms.no. 65, general administration (ser.d) dept., dated 15-2-1997.3. the high court informed that the appointments of the nine provisionally selected candidates shall be provisionally as family court judges under the family courts act to man family courts and mahila courts only. as the proposal for sanction and notification are for the posts of district and sessions judges grade ii, it is for consideration whether the candidates provisionally appointed in such requirement can now be provisionally appointed designating them as family courts judges.4. the high court has stated that the nine recommended candidates to be provisionally appointed as family court judges would be recruited into higher judicial service as district judges grade ii as and when vacancies in the cadre to the extent of reservation for women become available in order of their merit subject to the rule of reservation, it has to be considered in view of rule 2 of the special rules and whether they can be so adjusted as suggested in view of rule 6 of the special rules.5. whether the provisionally selected candidates recruited as district judges in the andhra pradesh state higher judicial service can be kept out of the service by provisional appointment to some other post and recruiting them into the posts of district judges on the availability of vacancies reserved for women.6. the appointments to the posts of district judges shall be made by the governor of the state, where as under the family courts act, 1984, the state government appoints persons to be judges of the family courts. hence the appropriate procedure to be adopted for making the suggested appointments may also be considered."5. the high court considered the aspects brought to its notice in a meeting of the full court held on 21st november, 2000. the high court then replied to the state government as follows:"for query no.1:as per the rules in force, the vacancies relating to sc and st candidates cannot be straight away de-reserved. if there are no qualified candidates of sc and st available, the said vacancies have to be carried forward for limited recruitment. therefore, the high court is of the view that the vacancies reserved for sc and st candidates cannot be dereserved.for query no. 2:as per the rules in force, the vacancies relating to each category of candidates belonging backward class group a,b,c and d cannot be converted into other categories and they have to be carried forward for limited recruitment, if the candidates belonging to each sub-group are not available. therefore, the high court is of the view that the vacancies reserved for each sub group cannot be filed up with the candidates of other sub groups.for query no. 3:the advertisement for the recruitment of women candidates was made inviting applications for the posts of district and sessions judges, grade ii. the government accorded sanction of 10 additional posts in g.o. ms. no. 172, law (la&j scf) department dated: 3.9.1996. there is no provision in the special rules for a.p. state higher judicial service for eventual absorption of the candidates appointed as family court judges into the cadre of district judges, grade ii against the future vacancies falling with the direct recruitment quota. in this regard, two aspects viz., (1) suitability test from the point of view of merit of the candidates and (2) legality of recruitment by inviting applications exclusively from women candidates only, have been considered by the high court.regarding the suitability, it is noticed by the high court that the candidates who were provisionally selected have got less marks even if 40% is taken as minimum marks for ocs and 30% for scs and sts for the purpose of selection as district judges grade ii. the recommendation through the letter 4th cited, was for appointment of the women candidates as family court judges and not as district and sessions judges, grade ii. the high court, therefore, is of the view that it is not conductive to the efficiency in service and the image of judiciary if the candidates who have got such lower marks are inducted into higher judicial service.regarding the legality of recruitment, the high court is of the view that there are formidable legal impediments in the way of recommending the candidates for appointment as district and sessions judges, grade ii. the high court is of the further view that the spl. rules for a.p. state higher judicial service issued in exercise of powers conferred under article 233 and the proviso to article 309 of the constitution of india and those rules enjoin that 33. 1/3% of the total number of permanent posts shall be filled or reserved to be filled by direct recruitment. the government accorded sanction of 10 posts of district and sessions judges, grade ii in addition to the existing cadre strength exclusively for women candidates to be recruited by direct recruitment. this was purportedly done by relaxation of rule 2 of the special rules for a.p. state higher judicial service. rule 2 provides for method of appointment and the proportion between the recruits by transfer (promotes) and direct recruits from the bar. by resorting to relaxation of the said rule, it is not legally permissible to earmark 10 sanctioned posts exclusively for direct recruitment of women candidates since there is no rule in the a.p. state higher judicial service giving the power to relax any of the rules. the power to relax the rules would only be under the a.p. state and subordinate service rules. even if there is such power, it is doubtful whether the basic rules of recruitment can be relaxed in view of the rulings of the supreme court in keshav chandra joshi v. union of india manu/sc/0061/1991manu/sc/0061/1991 : air1991sc284 and in j&k public service commission v. narinder mohan manu/sc/0426/1994manu/sc/0426/1994 : (1994)illj780sc . the high court is of the further view that ear-making 10 additional posts sanctioned only to the women candidates amount to cent percent reservation in favour of women which is not legal/constitutionally permissible. even if the reservation provided under rule 22-a of the a.p. state and subordinate service rules is made applicable to a.p. state higher judicial service, the reservation could be to the extent of 1/3rd only.for query no. 4:since there is no rule under the spl. rules for a.p. state higher judicial service to absorb the family courts judges into the higher judicial service as district & sessions judges, grade ii as and when vacancies in the cadre to the extent of reservation for women become available, the high court is of the view that they cannot be absorbed in view of rule 2 read with rule 6 of the special rules for a.p. state higher judicial service.for query no. 5:according to rule 6 of the spl. rules for a.p. state higher judicial service, seniority of a person appointed to the category of district and sessions judges, shall be determined with reference to the date from which he was continuously on duty in the category. the spl. rules do not provide to keep provisionally selected district judges out of service as family court and mahila court judges and recruiting them into the posts of district judges as and when vacancies for women for direct recruitment become available in order to their merit and subject to the rule of reservation. therefore, the high court is of the view that the provisionally selected candidates as district judges cannot be kept out of that service by provisional appointment to some other post and recruiting them into the posts of district judges on the availability of vacancies reserved for women.for query no. 6:in view of the above views expressed by the high court, this query needs no clarification.in the light of the above views for the queries raised by the government, the high court of andhra pradesh is not in favour of recommending any women candidates on provisional selection for appointment as district and sessions judges, grade ii under the a.p. state higher judicial service in pursuance of the notification issued on the basis of the high court's letter no. 4610/96-b.spl dated: 7.10.1996."thus the full court, in its meeting held on 21st november, 2000 was not in favour of appointing any person from the panel prepared earlier.6. it must be noted that the vacancies were for judges of family courts and mahila courts. these courts could be manned by district and sessions judges, grade ii. the state government had thus created 10 posts of district and sessions judge, grade ii. the advertisement was also for appointment to the posts of district and sessions judge, grade ii. the appointments were to be not to any ex-cadre posts but to posts in the cadre of district and sessions judge, grade ii. the rules prescribed that in the cadre of district and sessions judges there had to be reservations for scheduled tribes, scheduled caste, backward classes (group a,b,c or d) and women. the rules did not allow 100% reservation for women. by reserving all the 10 posts for women the high court had inadvertently created a 100% reservation for women. further the posts advertised were 5 open competition, 2 scheduled caste, 1 scheduled tribe, 1 backward class group a and 1 backward class group b. yet the panel sent to the government consisted of 7 opened competition candidates, 1 scheduled caste candidate and 1 backward class group d candidate. such a selection was entirely against the rules and against the reservation policy. the rules also required that if no sc or st candidate was available then the vacancy had to be carried forward. similarly the vacancy of backward class group a, b, c and/or d could not be converted into other category. because of these difficulties the persons empanelled could not be appointed in the cadre of district & sessions judge grade ii. the high court initially considered that the petitioners could be appointed in ex-cadre posts as family court and/or mahila court judges and then absorb them in the cadre of district and sessions judge, grade ii as and when vacancy for women arose. the high court correctly realised that this could not be done. it was also noticed that the candidates provisionally selected i.e. the petitioners had got less marks than those normally prescribed for such selection.7. it must be mentioned that in the meantime the petitioners had made representations both to the chief justice as well as to the chief minister. they received no reply. this writ petition was thus filed by the nine women lawyers who were selected and whose names were forwarded to the state government for appointment. the petitioners sought directions to appoint them in the cadre of district and sessions judges, grade ii. thereafter on 20th july, 2000 another advertisement was issued calling for applications for appointment to six posts of district judges. in this advertisement only one post was reserved for women. the petition was thus amended and a further direction to quash the decision of the full court not to appoint as per the selection earlier made to quash the subsequent advertisement have been sought.8. it is settled law that no right accrues to a person merely because a person is selected and his or her name is put on a panel. the petitioners have no right to claim an appointment. even otherwise, the selection was contrary to the rules in force at that time. there could not be 100% reservation for women. also the reservation policy had not been adhered to. the posts which are created are posts of district and sessions judges, grade ii. there is no separate posts of judges of family courts and mahila courts. thus the petitioners could not be appointed as judges of family courts and mahila courts in ex-cadre posts even provisionally. this would amount to creation of ex-cadre posts not sanctioned by the government. no fault can be found with the high court being in favour of not appointing the petitioners.9. the unfortunate part is that even though family court and mahila courts have been established no appointments have been made. thus, till date the family courts and mahila courts are not being manned.10. mr. nagesxhwar rao has relied upon the case of r.s. mittal v. union of india reported in manu/sc/1009/1995manu/sc/1009/1995 : 1995(2)scale433 . in this case even though the court was of the opinion that the selection was not proper, it refused to interfere. mr. nageshwar rao also relied on the case of munna roy v. union of india reported in manu/sc/2607/2000manu/sc/2607/2000 : (2000)9scc283 . in this case the court directed appointment of the selected candidate in spite of the fact that she had no right to the appointment. both these cases are based on the peculiar facts of those cases.11. as the posts were lying vacant for such a long period of time initially it was suggested that if the petitions filed an undertaking before this court, that they are willing to be appointed in ex-cadre posts of judges of the family court and/or mahial court and that they will not claim any right to be subsequently absorbed in the cadre of district and sessions judges grade ii then the court could consider directing the state government to appoint these nine petitioners. eight of these petitioners have filed undertakings before this court. however on a proper consideration of the matter, we are of the view that this court cannot direct the state government to appoint these petitioners. if such a direction were to be given this court would be crating ex-cadre posts and making appointments contrary to rules. thus it is not possible for this court to accede to the request of mr. nageshwar rao to appoint petitioners, on the ex-cadre posts, as judges of family courts and mahila courts.12. writ petition is thus dismissed. there will be no order as to costs.
1. heard mr. g.s. mani, learned counsel for the petitioner, mr. venkkata ramani, learned additional advocate general for the state of tamil nadu and mr. ranjit kumar, learned solicitor general for the union of india. it is submitted by mr. mani, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner that though the constitutional validity of sections 499 and 500 of the indian penal code (ipc) and section 199 of the code of criminal procedure (cr.p.c.) has been upheld in the case of subramanian swamy v. union of india, ministry of law and ors. manu/sc/0621/2016manu/sc/0621/2016 : 2016 (5) scale 379, yet the present case, apart from the constitutional validity, also harps on the concept of fair criticism, discernment and dissection of activities of the state government and disapproval of views taken in the matters of administration and policy decisions. mr. mani, learned counsel would emphatically submit that the petition also raises a question whether the authority who is entitled to launch a prosecution under sections 499 and 500 indian penal code through the public prosecutor should do it against a person solely because he is critical or has a different opinion.2. learned counsel would further submit that the office of the public prosecutor has its own independence; and the public prosecutor has been conferred an independent role under the provisions of the code of criminal procedure and he cannot become a post office in the hands of the authorities to file prosecutions for criminal defamation without scrutinizing whether a case is made out or not. it is urged by him that a sustained democracy is predicated fundamentally on the idea of criticism, dissent, and tolerance, for the will, desire, aspirations and sometimes the desperation of the people on many an occasion are expressed through such criticism. mr. mani would submit that the citizenry right to criticize cannot be atrophied by constant launching of criminal prosecution for defamation on each and every issue to silence the critics because when criticism in a vibrant democracy in this manner is crippled, the democracy which is best defined as the "government of the people, by the people, for the people" would lose its cherished values.3. mr. ranjit kumar, learned solicitor general, in his turn, would submit that apart from the public prosecutor who has a definitive role under section 199(2) of the code of criminal procedure, the sanctioning authority also has a significant and sacred role under sub-section (4) of the said provision and, therefore, a complaint cannot be filed in a routine manner to harass a citizen.4. issue notice.5. as mr. ranjit kumar, learned solicitor general has entered appearance on behalf of respondent no. 2 and mr. m.m. kashyap, learned counsel assisting mr. venkkata ramani, learned senior counsel has entered appearance for respondent no. 4, no further notice need be issued.6. as far as respondent nos. 1 and 3 are concerned, let notice be issued fixing a returnable within four weeks.7. the interim order of stay passed on 20.11.2015 shall remain in force until further orders. let the matter be listed on 24.8.2016.
kurian joseph, j.1. leave granted.2. the impugned judgment on limitation to file a suit gives an interesting reading on reasoning:learned trial court has vide impugned order, disposed the application filed under order 7 rule 11 by the defendant on the ground that 01.01.2011 was non-working saturday, therefore the suit was filed on 03.01.2011 is within limitation. although, there is no bar for fling of suit on non-working saturday but if the suit is not filed on non-working saturday under the assumption that it is non-working saturday then the mistake of non-fling is a bonafide mistake, so the mistake is taken as bonafide mistake.3. it is not in dispute that the last date for fling the suit was 31.12.2010, the last day of winter vacation for court. 01.01.2011 was a saturday, and even according to the high court, it is non-working saturday for the judges for enabling them to write judgments and regular hearing of cases is not heard on a non-working saturday. obviously, it was not a holiday for the registry and there is no question of any confusion, though such confusion also cannot save limitation to file a suit.4. section 4 of the limitation act, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as 'the act'), dealing with "expiry of prescribed period when court is closed", no doubt, applies to suits as well, and in case the prescribed period for any suit, appeal or application expires on a day when the court is closed, the suit, appeal or application may be instituted, preferred or made on the day when the court reopens.5. the explanation under section 4 of the act also makes it clear that:explanation.-a court shall be deemed to be closed on any day within the meaning of this section if during any part of its normal working hours it remains closed on that day.6. there is no case for anybody that even for part of the day, the registry was closed. but section 5 of the act which deals with "extension of prescribed period in certain cases", applies only to appeals or applications and not to suits. therefore, no court or tribunal can extend the period of limitation for fling a suit. even if any cause, beyond the control of the plaintiff is shown also, the only extension is what is permitted under section 4 of the act, the period coming under court holiday.7. thus, both the trial court and the high court have gravely gone wrong on the first principles on the law of limitation. therefore, the impugned order is set aside. the application filed by the appellant under order vii rule 11 of the code of civil procedure, 1908 is allowed. recovery suit no. 1/2011 on the file of the adj, gwalior, madhya pradesh is dismissed.8. the appeal is allowed as above. there shall be no order as to costs.
r.p. sethi, j.1. aggrieved by the determination of annual valuation made in terms of section 174 of the calcutta municipal corporation act, 1980 (hereinafter called "the 1980 act"),the appellant-owner of a nine storeyed building, admittedly, used for commercial purposes, filed an appeal before the municipal assessment tribunal who vide its order dated 26 th february, 1999 allowed the appeal and fixed the annual value on the basis of rent actually received by the appellant-owner. feeling aggrieved, the respondent-corporation approached the high court under article 227 of the constitution of india who, vide the order impugned in this appeal, set aside the order of the tribunal and directed it to hear the appeals on merits keeping in mind that total amount paid by the sub-tenants to the tenant of the appellant should also be taken into consideration in assessing the annual valuation.2. it is not disputed that the property in question was leased out by the appellants to their tenant, named banwarilal pasari at a rental of rs. 75,000/- per month vide a duly executed lease deed (annexure p-1). there is also no dispute that the building is a nine storeyed building and issued for commercial purposes. the respondent-corporation carried out the general revision of the annual valuation of the premises effective from fourth quarter of 1984-85 and also for the period from fourth quarter of 1990-91. proposed valuation was communicated to the owners vide two notices issued under the 1980 act directing them to attend the hearing before the hearing officer of the corporation on the date specified in the notice. the appellant submitted objections to the notices and objected to the same challenging the proposed valuation and the basis thereof. the hearing officer vide his two orders dated 15.4.1996 fixed annual valuation from fourth quarter of 1984-85 at rs. 18,80,600/- and from fourth quarter of 1990-91 at rs. 21,63,560/-. the annual valuation assessment was made under section 174 of the 1980 act by taking into consideration the rent paid by the sub-tenants. the municipal assessment tribunal accepted the appeal of the owners by relying upon the judgment of this court in corporation of calcutta v. life insurance corporation of india manu/sc/0392/1970manu/sc/0392/1970 : [1971]1scr249 . not satisfied with the judgment of the tribunal, municipal corporation moved the high court byway of a petition under article 227 of the constitution of india, which was allowed by setting aside the order of the tribunal vide judgment impugned in this appeal. the high court held that the aforesaid decision of this court had no application to an assessment made under section 174 of the 1980 act which was found to be materially different from section 168 of the calcutta municipal act, 1951 under which the assessment had been made in life insurance corporation's case (supra). the high court further held that under 1951 act the annual valuation in no case could exceed the standard rent fixed by the west bengal premises rent control(temporary provision) act, 1950 but under the 1980 act which had a non-obstante clause, the annual valuation can be fixed notwithstanding anything contained in the west bengal tenancy act, 1956 or any other law for the time being inforce. it has been further held that under the 1980 act, the consolidated rate is primarily leviable, if the land and building is let upon lessor and if the land and building is sub-let, still upon the superior lessor under section 193 of the act, and for that reason section 194 of the act has conferred a right upon the lessor, lessee or the sub- lessee to recover the excess amount from their respective tenants for the excess payable by them due to creation of tenancy or sub-tenancy. it was further held that the municipal corporation is in no way bound by the fixation of standard rent of fair rent by the rent controller and the rent realised by a tenant from the sub-tenant or by a sub-tenant from his tenant is required to be taken into consideration and such amount to be treated as gross rent of the land or building for the purposes of section 174 of the 1980 act. finding that the appellate tribunal had acted illegally and with material irregularity in holding that in assessing annual valuation of the building the amount realised from the sub-tenants cannot be taken into consideration, the matter was remanded to the tribunal to hear the appeal afresh on merits and decide the same in the light of the observations made by the high court. not satisfied with the judgment of the high court, the owners of the building have preferred this appeal. when this appeal was listed in the court on 10th november, 2001, the judges constituting the bench felt that following observations of this court in the case of lic required reconsideration:"but under the act the quantum of the consolidated rate depends upon the annual values of land or building on the gross rent for which the land or building might reasonably be expected to let and not the gross rent at which the subordinate interest of a tenant may be expected to sublet "3. the bench directed the registry to place the matter before the hon'ble chief justice for listing this matter before a bench of three judges. in such circumstances this appeal has come before us.4. it is contended on behalf of the appellant that the order passed by the municipal assessment tribunal was strictly according to law and did not suffer from any infirmity with which the high court could have interfered. it is submitted that while assessing the valuation of the property, the amount taken by the tenant from a sub-tenant cannot be taken into consideration in view of the judgment of this court in lic's case (supra). according to the appellant , the annual value of the land and building has to be deemed to be gross annual rent including service charges as contemplated under section 174 of the 1980 act which does not include the rent received by a 'tenant from the sub-tenant. according to the appellant annual value has to be determined on the basis of the actual rent received by the owner unless it is established that such rent is not bonafide paid and that the same is shown fraudulently only for the purposes of depriving the authorities from assessing the annual rental value. it is argued on behalf of the appellant that despite the changes made in the 1980 act, the law laid down in padma debi's case is still valid for the purpose of determining the gross annual rent of a building under the calcutta municipal corporation act. as in the present case the assessment made by the tribunal proceeds on the basis of the actual rent received by the appellant and in the absence of any allegations of extraneous circumstances , the order of the tribunal has to be upheld by setting aside the impugned judgment. it is also stated that in the present case there is no difference between the standard rent and the actual rent realized by the landlord from the tenant because of application of section 2 and section 9 of the west bengal premises tenancy act. the issue as to whether the standard rent is the upper limit of the reasonable rent does not fall for decision, under the circumstances of the present case.5. it is contended on behalf of the respondent- corporation that the high court has correctly interpreted section 174 of 1980 act which is in accordance with the various judgments of this court. it is submitted that in the corporation of calcutta v. padma debi and ors. manu/sc/0284/1961manu/sc/0284/1961 : [1962]3scr49 , this court had divided the municipal laws into two district groups. one such group, referred to municipal laws of certain states which did not expressly exclude application of rent restriction acts in the matter of determination of annual value of a building for the purposes of levying property taxes and the other group of such municipal laws which expressly exclude application of rent restriction acts in the matter of such determination. it is submitted that unlike calcutta municipal act, 1923 and calcutta municipal act, 1951, the new 1980 act contains specific provision in section 174 providing a non obstante clause specifically excluding the operation and effect of the west bengal premises tenancy act, 1956 and any such other law in force, which would fall in the second group of cases as referred to in padma debi's case (supra).6. to appreciate the rival contentions of the parties, it is necessary to make reference to some statutory provisions relevant for the purposes of resolving the controversy. the 1980 act was enacted to amend and consolidate the law relating to the municipal affairs of calcutta. chapter xii deals with the power of taxation at consolidated rates. section 170 authorises the corporation to levy certain taxes enumerated therein. section 174, dealing with the determination of annual valuation of the property within the municipal corporation provides:"174. determination of annual valuation - (1)notwithstanding anything contained in the west bengal premises tenancy act, 1956 or in any other law for the time being in force, for the purpose of assessment to the consolidated rate, the annual value of any land or building shall be deemed to be the gross annual rent including service charges , if any, at which such land or building might at the time of assessment be reasonably expected to let from year to year, less an allowance of ten per cent, for the cost of repairs and other expenses necessary to maintain such land or building in a state to command such gross rent:provided that where there is a transfer, intervivos, of ownership of any land or building since the last preceding periodical assessment under section 179, the annual value of such land or building shall be fixed at seven and a half percent of the amount stated in the deed of transfer as consideration for such transfer or, if no consideration is stated in such deed of transfer, at seven and a half per cent of the estimated market value thereof:provided further that while determining the annual value in the case of any land or building or portion thereof exclusively used by the owner for his residential purpose, the gross annual rent of such land or building or portion, as the case maybe, shall be reduced, --(a) where the gross annual rent does not exceed six hundred rupees, by thirty per cent;(b) where the gross annual rent exceeds six hundred rupees but does not exceed eighteen thousand rupees, by such percentage of the gross annual rent as is worked out by dividing the gross annual rent by six hundred and subtracting the quotient from thirty-one, the difference being rounded off to the nearest place of decimal:provided also that no such reduction in gross annual rent shall be made-(a) in case the total covered area in any land or building under occupation for residential purpose by the owner exceeds one hundred and fifty square meters, or(b) where a person owns or occupies for residential purposes more than one plot of land or building or portions thereof within the municipal limit of calcutta.(2) the annual value of any land which is not built upon shall be fixed at seven per cent of the estimated market value of the land.(3) if the gross annual rent of any class or classes of land or buildings used exclusively for hospital or educational purposes or for the purposes of sports or as a place of worship or as a place for disposal of the dead cannot be easily estimated, the gross annual rent of such building shall be deemed to be five per cent of the value of the building obtained by adding the estimated cost of erecting the building at the time of assessment less a reasonable amount to be deducted on account of depreciation, if any, to the estimated present market value of the land valued with the building as part of the same premises.(4) in the case of any land or building or part thereof used for public cinema shows or theatrical performances or as a place of similar public recreation , amusement or entertainment, the gross annual rent of such land or building or part thereof , as the case may be, shall be deemed to be seven and a half per cent of the gross annual receipts in respect of such cinema shows or theatrical performances or place of public recreation, amusement or entertainment, including receipts from rent and advertisements and sale of admission tickets but excluding taxes on the same of such tickets:provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply in the case of temporary fairs, circuses, and casual shows or performances.(4a) if the gross annual rent of any land or building or part thereof cannot be easily estimated, the gross annual rent of such land or building for the purposes of sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be seven and half per cent of the value of the building obtained by adding the estimated present cost of erecting the building at the time of assessment less a reasonable amount to be deducted on account of depreciation, if any, to the estimated present market value of the land:provided that the estimated present cost shall not include the cost of any plant or machinery, excepting those enumerated in schedule viii, on the land or the building as aforesaid.(5) the annual value as determined under this chapter shall be rounded off to the nearest ten rupees ."section 180 deals with the revision of assessment and section 181 provides for settlement of returns and inspection of lands and buildings for the purposes of assessment. section 136 provides that subject to provisions of section 181 or section 182 any objection to the annual value of the land and building as entered in the assessment list shall be made by the owner or the person liable to pay the consolidated rate, in writing, to the municipal commissioner before the date fixed in the notice under section 194 or section 195 and shall state in what respect the annual value is disputed. section 188 deals with the hearing of objections and section 189 provides an appeal before the municipal assessment tribunal. section 193catalogues the incidence of consolidated rate on lands and buildings and provides:"193(1) the consolidated rate on lands and buildings shall be primarily leviable, --(a) if the land or building is let, upon the lessor;(b) if the land or building is sublet, upon the superior lessor;(c) if the land and building is unlet, upon the person in whom the right to let such land or building vests.(2) the consolidated rate on any land or building, which is the property of the corporation and the possession of which has been delivered under any agreement or licensing arrangement, shall be leviable upon the transferee or the licensee , as the case may be.(3) the liability of the several owners of any land or building constituting a single unit of assessment, which is of purports to be severally owned in part or flats or rooms, for payment of consolidated rates or any installment thereof payable during the period of such ownership shall be joint and several:provided that the municipal commissioner may apportion the amount of consolidated rate on which land or building among the co-owners.(4) notwithstanding the vesting of any land in the state under the calcutta thika tenancy(acquisition and regulation) act, 1981, in the case of any land comprised in a thika tenancy, the consolidated rate assessed in respect of such land and any hut or building made thereon shall be primarily leviable upon then thika tenant.7. section 194 provides:"194. apportionment of liability for consolidated rate on land or building when the premises assessed are let or sublet -- (1) if the annual valuation of any land or building exceeds the amount calculated on the basis of the rent of such land or building payable to the person upon whom the consolidated rate on such land or building isle viable under section 193, such person shall be entitled to receive from his tenant and difference between the amount of the consolidated rate on such land or building and the amount which would be leviable if the consolidated rate on such land or building were calculated on the basis of the rent payable to him.(2) if the annual valuation of any land or building which is sublet exceeds the amount calculated on the basis of rent of such land or building payable to the tenant by his sub-tenant or to the sub-tenant by the person holding under him , the tenant or the sub-tenant shall be entitled to receive from his sub-tenant or the person holding under him, as the case may be, the difference between any sum recovered under this act from such tenant or sub-tenant and the amount of consolidated rate on such land or building which would be leviable if the annual valuation of such land or building were calculated on the basis of rent payable to the tenant by him sub-tenant or the sub-tenant by the person holding under him."8. it may be noticed at this stage that before the incorporation of section 174 of 1980 act, section 168 of the calcutta municipal act, 1951 dealt with the assessment of lands and buildings to the consolidated rate. sub-section(1) of section 168 provided:"168 (1) for the purposes of assessment to the consolidated rate the annual value of any land or building shall be deemed to be the gross annual rent at which the land or building might at the time of assessment be reasonably expected to let from year to year, less, in the case of a building , an allowance of ten per cent for the cost of repairs and for all other expenses necessary to maintain the building in a state to command such gross rent:provided that in respect of any land or building the rent of which has been fixed under the provisions of west bengal premises rent control(temporary provisions) act, 1950 or the west bengal premises tenancy act, 1956, the annual value thereof shall not exceed the annual amount of the rent so fixed."similarly, section 127 of the calcutta municipal act, 1923 provide :"127. for the purpose of assessing land and building to the consolidated rate,--(a) the annual value of land, and the annual value of any building erected for letting purpose or ordinarily let, shall be deemed to be the gross annual rent at which the land or building might at the time of assessment reasonably be expected to let from year to year , less, in the case of a building, an allowance of ten per cent for the cost of repairs and for all other expenses necessary to maintain the building in a state to command such gross rent; and(b) the annual value of any building not erected for letting purposes and not ordinarily let shall be deemed to be five per cent on the sum obtained by adding the estimated present cost of erecting the building, less reasonable amount to be deducted on account of depreciation (if any), to the estimated present value of the land valued with the building as part of the same premises.provided as follows:-i) the annual value of the bustee shall be deemed to be the gross annual rent at which the land contained within it, excluding the lands which have been left vacant for the purposes of any bustee street prescribed in or under a standard plan approved by the corporation under chapter xxii, might reasonably be expected to let from year to year, plus the gross annual rent at which the huts erected thereon might reasonably be expected to let from year to year, after deducting therefrom the rent of the land and an allowance of ten per cent, for the cost of repairs and for all expenses necessary to maintain such huts in state to command such gross rent;ii) in calculating the value of any land or building under this section, the value of any machinery on such land or in such building shall be excluded, but all fixtures including lifts and electric and other fittings which add to the convenience of the building shall be valued, subject in the case of a lift to such deduction from the valuation, as the executive officer may think proper, on account of the cost of repairs to, maintenance of, and attendance on, such lift;iii) if in the case of building valued under clause (b), the annual value of which does not exceed five hundred rupees, any exceptional circumstances exist which render a valuation of five per cent, on the cost of erecting the building less depreciation, excessive, a lower percentage may be taken;(iv) when any building has been valued at a special percentage taken under proviso (iii),it may be re-valued at any time after the exception circumstances referred to in that proviso have ceased to exist."9. the words "notwithstanding anything contained in the west bengal premises tenancy act, 1956 or any other law for the time being in force" appearing in section 174 of 1980 act were non existent in section 168 of 1951 act and section 123 of 1923 act.10. in support of their view points, learned counsel for the parties have relied upon various judgments of this court reported in sm. padma debi's case (supra); lic's case (supra); guntur municipal council v. guntur town ratepayers' association manu/sc/0394/1970manu/sc/0394/1970 : [1971]2scr423 : [1971]2scr423 ; municipal corporation , indore and ors. v. ratnaprabha and ors. manu/sc/0339/1976manu/sc/0339/1976 : [1977]1scr1017 diwan daulat rai kapoor and ors. v. new delhi municipal committee and ors. manu/sc/0393/1979manu/sc/0393/1979 : [1980]122itr700(sc) : [1980]122itr700(sc) balbir singh and ors. v. mcd and ors. manu/sc/0222/1984manu/sc/0222/1984 : [1985]152itr388(sc) srikant kashinath jituri and ors. v. corporation of the city of belgaum manu/sc/0059/1995manu/sc/0059/1995 : air1995sc288 indian oil corporation ltd. v. municipal corporation and anr. manu/sc/0744/1995manu/sc/0744/1995 : [1995]3scr246 : [1995]3scr246 asstt. general manager, central bank of india and ors. v. commissioner municipal corporation for the city of ahmedabad and ors. manu/sc/0742/1995manu/sc/0742/1995 : (1995)4scc696 east india commercial co. pvt. ltd. v.corporation of calcutta manu/sc/0249/1998manu/sc/0249/1998 : [1998]2scr543 : [1998]2scr543 government servant cooperative house building society ltd. and ors. v.union of india and ors. manu/sc/0482/1998manu/sc/0482/1998 : [1998]3scr996 : [1998]3scr99611. in padma debi's case (supra) this court dealt with the law relating to annual valuation under section 127 of bengal act no. 3 of 1923 and held that the words "gross annual rent" at which the land or building might, at the time of assessment, reasonably be expected to let from year to year implies that the rent which the landlord might realise if the house was let is the basis for fixing the annual value of the building. the criterion was the rent realisable by the landlord and not the value of the holding in the hands of the tenant. the value of the property to the owner is the standard rent in making the assessment. the word "reasonably" appearing in the section was held to be not capable of precise definition as in ultimate analysis the same was the question of fact. whether a particular act was reasonable or not depended upon the circumstances in a given case. a bargain between a willing lessor and willing lessee uninfluenced by any extraneous circumstances can afford a guiding test of reasonableness. the phrase "at the time of assessment" was held to mean the assessment commenced with the making of the valuation under section 131 of the act and ended with the determination of the objection under section 140 thereof. as in that case the rent control act of 1950 was found to be in existence before determination of the assessment, the corporation was held to have no power to fix the annual value of the premises higher than the standard rent.12. in lic's case (supra) this court dealt with section 168 of the calcutta municipal corporation act for the purposes of determination of annual value of the premises. the facts of that case were that m/s. a. firpo ltd. were the tenants of the building belonging to asiatic assurance company ltd. under a lease at a monthly rent of rs. 2,000/- which was increased by mutual agreement to rs. 2800/- per month. m/s. firpo ltd., the lessee had sub-let a major part of the premises to five different tenants and the aggregate rent received from the sub-tenants amounted to rs. 4520/-. the corporation assessed the annual value of the premises at rs. 32076/- for six years. the objection raised by the owner against the determination of the annual value was rejected by the special officer of the corporation and in appeal filed by the lic, which had statutorily acquired the right of the owner of the building, the court of small causes assessed rs. 30240/- as the annual value. the said order was confirmed in appeal to the high court under section 183(3)of the calcutta municipal corporation act, 1951. in appeal filed in this court, the corporation claimed that in determining the annual value of the premises the assessing authority was entitled to take into consideration the rental received by m/s. a. firpo ltd. from its sub-tenant. reliance was placed upon padma debi's case . this court approved the judgment in padma debi's case , but finding that as the standard rent stood determined by the definition in section 2(10)(b) of the west bengal premises rent control (temporary provisions) act, 1950, held that the high court was right in assessing the annual value on the basis of the standard rent as statutorily determined. it was further held that under the act the quantum of consolidated rate depends upon the value of the land or building or the gross rent for which the land or building might reasonably be expected to let and not the gross rent at which the subordinate interest of a tenant may be expected to sub-let. in determining the assessment of annual value, the assessing authority is not concerned with the rent which the tenant may receive from his sub-tenant. it is the gross rent which the owner may realise by letting the land or building under a bargain uninfluenced by extraneous considerations which determines the annual value.13. in guntur town rate payers' association's case (supra)it was held that the test for determining the rent at which the building may reasonably be expected to be let is essentially what rent premises can lawfully fetch, if let out to a hypothetical tenant. the municipality is not free to assess any arbitrary annual value and has to look to and is bound by the fair or the standard rent which would be payable for a particular premises under the rent control act in force during the year of assessment. such findings were returned on the basis of the judgment of this court in padma debi's case .14. in smt. ratnaprabha's case (supra) this court for the first time considered the effect of non obstante clause appearing in madhya pradesh municipal corporation act, 1956 for determining the gross annual rent for which the building might reasonably be expected to be let. clause (b) of section 138 of the said act provided:"(b) the annual value of any building shall notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force be deemed to be the gross annual rent at which such building, together with its appurtenances and any furniture that may be let for use or enjoyment therewith might reasonably at the time of assessment be expected to be let from year to year, less an allowance of ten per cent for the cost of repairs and for all other expenses necessary to maintain the building in a state to command such gross annual rent."15. interpreting the section, the court held:"as has been stated, clause (b) of section 133 of the act provides that the annual value of any building shall 'notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force' be deemed to be the gross annual rent for which the building might "reasonably at the time of the assessment be expected to be let from year to year". while therefore the requirement of the law is that the reasonable letting value should determine the annual value of the building, it has also been specifically provided that this would be so 'notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force'. it appears to us that it would be a proper interpretation of the provisions of clause (b) of section 138 of the act to hold that in a case where the standard rent of a building has been fixed under section 7 of the madhya pradesh accommodation contract act, and there is nothing to show that there has been fraud or collusion, that would be its reasonable letting value, but, where this is not so, and the building has never been let out and is being used in a manner where the question of fixing its standard rent does not arise, it would be permissible to fix its reasonable rent without regard to the provisions of the madhya pradesh accommodation control act, 1961. this view will, in our opinion, give proper effect to the non-obstante clause in clause (b)with due regard to its other provision that the letting value should be 'reasonable'."16. after referring to padma devi's case , lic's case and guntur town rate payer's case (supra), it was held in that case that the high court had not properly appreciated the difference between the wording of section 127 of the calcutta municipal corporation act, 1923 and section 138(c) of the madhya pradesh municipal corporation act, 1956 and thus committed an error in thinking that the case was virtually similar to padma debi's case .17. in diwan daulat rai's case (supra) this court held that the facts of the case were covered by the decisions of this court in lic's case and guntur town rate payer's case (supra).the landlord cannot, reasonably, expect to get more rent than the standard rent payable in accordance with the principles laid down in the rent control act. in a case where the standard rent of the building has not been fixed by the controller, the assessing authority has to arrive at its own figures of standard rent by applying the principles laid down in the rent act. such a task has to be performed by the assessing authority as a part of process of assessment and in doing do it does not usurp the functions of the rent controller because it does not fix the standard rent which would be binding between the landlord and tenant but merely arrives at an estimate of standard rent for the purposes of determining the annual value of the building. the court referred to section 2(k) of the delhi rent control act , 1958 which defines the standard rent. sub-section (1)of section 4 of the delhi rent control act provided that, "no tenant shall, notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary , be liable to pay to his landlord for the occupation of any premises any amount in excess of the standard rent of the premises" and sub-section (2) of section 4 declares that "subject to provisions of sub-section(1) any agreement for the payment of rent in excess of the standard rent shall be construed as if it were an agreement for the payment of the standard rent only". section 5. sub-section (1) enacted a prohibition injuncting that "no person shall claim or receive any rent in excess of the standard rent, notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary ". section 6 proceeded to set out different formulae for determination of standard rent in different classes of cases. section 9, sub-section (1) provided that the controller shall, on an application made to him, either by the landlord or by the tenant, fix in respect of any premises the standard rent referred to in section 6 and sub-section (2) of section 9 laid down that in fixing the standard rent of any premises the controller shall fix an amount which appears to him to be reasonable having regard to the provisions of section 6 and the circumstances of the case. it appears that in this case the court did not directly deal with the effect of a non-obstante clause in the taxing municipal law. the case was found to be nearer to the law settled in lic's case and guntur town rate payee's case (supra). dealing with the case for the determination of the annual value where no standard rent has been fixed, the court observed:"the problem can also be looked at from a slightly different angle. when the rent control legislation provides for fixation of standard rent, which alone and nothing more than which the tenant shall be liable to pay to the landlord, it does so because it considers the measure of the standard rent prescribed by it to be reasonable. it lays down the norm of reasonableness in regard to the rent payable by the tenant to the landlord. any rent which exceeds this norm of reasonableness is regarded by the legislature as unreasonable or excessive. when the legislature has laid down this standard of reasonableness, would it be right for the court to say that the landlord may reasonably expect to receive rent exceeding the measure provided by this standard? would it be reasonable on the part of the landlord to expect to receive any rent in excess of the standard or norm of reasonableness laid down by the legislature and would such expectation be countenanced by the court as reasonable? the legislature obviously regards recovery of rent in excess of the standard rent as exploitative of the tenant and would it be proper for the court to say that it would be reasonable on the part of the landlord to recover such exploitative rent from the tenant? we are, therefore, of the view that, even if the standard rent has not been fixed by the controller, the landlord cannot reasonably expect to receive from a hypothetical tenant anything more than the standard rent determinable under the act and this would be so equally whether the building has been let out to a tenant who has lost his right to apply for fixation of the standard rent or the building is self-occupied by the owner. the assessing authority would, in either case, have to arrive at its own figure of the standard rent by applying principles laid down in the delhi rent control act, 1958 for determination of standard rent and determine the annual value of the building on the basis of such figure of standard rent."18. in balbir singh's case (supra) the court dealt with four different categories of properties, namely, (i) where the properties are self-occupied, that is, occupied by the owners ; (ii) where the properties are partly self- occupied and partly tenanted; (iii) where the land on which the property is constructed is leasehold land with a restriction that the leasehold interest shall not be transferable without the approval of the lessor and (iv) where the property has been constructed in stages, and to provide a criteria how rate able value can be determined in respect of those four categories of properties. relying upon dewan dault raj kapoor's case it was held that criteria for determining the rate able value of building is the annual rent which the owner might reasonably expect to get from a hypothetical tenant, if the building were to let from year to year less certain deductions. what is "reasonable" is a question of fact which depended on the fact and circumstances of a given situation. ordinarily, "a bargain between a willing lessor and a willing lessee uninfluenced by any extraneous circumstances may afford a guiding test of reasonableness" and in normal circumstances the actual rent payable by a tenant to the landlord would afford reliable evidence of what the landlord may reasonably expect to get from the hypothetical tenant, unless the rent is inflated or depressed by reason of extraneous considerations such as relationship, expectation of some other benefit, etc. but in case of a building subject to rent control legislation this approximation between may and often does get displaced, because under rent control legislation the landlord cannot claim to recover from the tenant anything more than the standard rent and his reasonable expectation must , therefore, be limited to the measure of the standard rent lawfully recoverable by him. there was no dispute that the area where the property sought to be taxed was situated, the provisions of rent restriction acts were applicable and there was non obstante clause in the municipal law under which the annual value had been assessed.19. in srikant kashinath jituri's case (supra), this court observed :"....we feel compelled to express our doubts as to the soundness and continuing relevance of the view taken by this court in several earlier decisions that the property tax must be determined on the basis of fair rent alone regardless of the actual rent received. fair rent very often means the rent prevailing prior to 1950 with some minor modifications and additions. property tax is the main source of revenue to the municipalities and municipal corporations. to compel these local bodies to levy and collect the property tax on the basis of fair rent alone, while asking them at the same time to perform all their obligatory and discretionary functions prescribed by the statute may, be to ask for the impossible. the cost of maintaining and laying roads, drains and other amenities , the salaries of staff and wages of employees - in short, all types of expenditure have gone up steeply over the least more than forty years. in such a situation, insistence upon levy of property tax on the basis of fair rent alone -disregarding the actual rent received- is neither justified nor practicable. none of the enactments says so expressly. the said principle has been evolved by courts by a process of interpretation.probably a time has come when the said principle may have to be reviewed."20. in indian oil corporation's case (supra) this court approved the view taken in ratnaprabha's case and in the interest of public good declined to reconsider the aforesaid decision. it was observed that the decision of this court in ratnaprabha's case, on the construction of section 138(b)of m.p. act, has all along been understood and justified on the basis of the presence of non obstante clause and the later decisions have distinguished it on that ground. the existence of non obstante clause in m.p. act was held to be the basis on which the decision in padma debi's case was distinguished in ratnaprabha's case itself.21. it assistant general manager, central bank of india's case (supra) it was contended on behalf of the appellant that even where the standard rent was not fixed and the rent act not applicable, it must be presumed that the annual rent for such buildings or lands or premises would be the standard rent alone and not the actual rent received. in that case section 129(c) of the municipal corporation act provided that the general taxes not less than 12% and not more than 13% of the rate able value of the buildings/ lands may be levied if the corporation so determines on a graduated scale. the expression "rate able value" was defined in clause (54) of the section 2 to mean, "the value of any building or land fixed whether with reference to any given premises or otherwise in accordance with the provisions of this act and the rules for the purpose of assessment of property taxes". rule 7 of the taxation rules provided that in order to fix the rate able value of any building, land or premises, there shall be deducted from the amount of the annual letting value of such building a sum equal to ten per cent of the annual letting value and the said deduction shall be in lieu of all allowances for repairs or any other account whatsoever. sub-clause (ii) of the definition provided that "in relation to any other period , the annual rent for which any building or land or premises, exclusive of furniture or machinery contained or situate therein or thereon, might reasonably be expected to let from year to year with reference to its use and shall include all payments made or agreed to be made to the owners by a person other than the owner occupying the building or land or premises on account of occupation, taxes, insurance or other charges incidental thereto". the proviso added to sub-clause (ii) was to the following effect;"(a) (i)m respect of any building or land or premises the standard rent of which has been fixed under section 11 of the bombay rents, hotel and lodging house rates control act, 1947, the annual rent thereof shall not exceed the annual amount of the standard rent so fixed;(aa) in respect of any building or land, or premises , the standard rent of which is not fixed under section 11 of the bombay rent, hotel and lodging house rates control act, 1947, the annual rent received by the owner in respect of such building or land or premises shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, be deemed to be the annual rent for which such building or land or premises might reasonably be expected to let from year to year with reference to its use."22. dealing with the points in controversy, the arguments urged and the issues involved, the court held:"it is true that the bombay rent act defines what standard rent is, provides for fixation of standard rent by the court and further provides that no landlord shall claim or receive any amount over and above the standard rent, making the same punishable with imprisonment and fine. yet, the fact remains that municipal corporations act says expressly that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the "annual rent received" -- which means the actual rent received - in respect of building etc., for which standard rent is not fixed under section 11of the bombay rent act shall be deemed to be the annual rent for which such building etc. for which such building etc. might reasonably be expected to be let from year to year with reference to its use. the validity of proviso (aa), though raised in the grounds of appeal in the special leave petition , has not been urged before us, probably advisedly . being a taxing enactment and also because the proviso does no more than to treat the actual rent received as the annual rent, the reasonableness of the said provision can hardly be questioned. be that as it may, we see no reason why the express language and command of proviso (aa) is not respected. both the enactments, viz., bombay rent act and bombay provincial municipal corporations act are state enactments. indeed, the municipal corporations act is a later enactment. in view of the express provision in proviso (aa), it must be held that for the purpose of the municipal corporation act, the actual rent received is the annual rent for the purposes of determining the annual letting value. the counsel for the appellants say that it cannot be. they say that one state enactment cannot be read so as to defeat and nullify the provisions of another state enactment. the submission is that both must be read harmoniously. the said argument, in our opinion, would have been perfectly justified if the non obstante clause were not there in proviso (aa). in its presence, acceptance of the said argument means that we ignore the non obstante clause in proviso (aa) altogether. such a course is not permissible to us. the court cannot treat any provision in an enactment as superfluous much less can it ignore its existence. the learned counsel, however, rely upon certain decision in support of their submissions to which a brief reference would now be in order."accordingly, we hold that proviso (aa) means what it says and has to be applied and followed in the cases covered by it. so far as the municipal corporations act is concerned, the annual rent is the actual rent received where the standard rent is not fixed under section 11 of the bombay rent act and it constitutes the basis for determining the annual letting value, rate able value and property taxes. that is the plain effect and meaning of proviso (aa). so far proviso (aaa) is concerned, an apprehension was expressed that it would enable the commissioner to question the actual rent received in every case and it would bean endless enquiry. in our opinion, however, the said provision is conceived to meet situations where the rent pub forward as the actual rent received is not a genuine plea., i.e., where it is a false plea. a landlord may let out a building at less than market rent for many a reason, e.g., the tenant is a close friend or a close relative or because the tenant is a charitable or religious organisation. proviso (aaa) does not enable the commissioner to ignore such situations for, in such cases, the rent actually received is genuinely stipulated one. this power is reserved to the commissioner only with a view to ensure that by merely putting forward a figure which is not true, persons do not escape the correct levy."23. in east india commercial co. pvt. ltd.'s case (supra)this court considered the determination of annual value under section 168 of the calcutta municipal corporation act, 1951 in respect of buildings which were actually let out to tenants on rent agreed but not fixed by the controller under the rent restriction act for the purposes of assessment of property tax., after referring to the relevant provisions of law and the judgments of this court, it was held:"from the aforesaid decisions, the principle which is deducible is that when the municipal act requires the determination of the annual value, that act has to be read along with rent restriction act which provides for the determination of fair rent or standard rent. reading the two acts together the rate able value cannot be more than the fair or standard rent which can be fixed under the rent control act. the exception to this rule is that whenever any municipal act itself provides the modes of determination of the annual letting value like the central bank of india case manu/sc/0742/1995manu/sc/0742/1995 : (1995)4scc696 : (1995)4scc696 relating to ahmedabad or contains a non obstante clause as in ratnaprabha case manu/sc/0339/1976manu/sc/0339/1976 : [1977]1scr1017 : [1977]1scr1017 then the determination of the annual letting value has to be according to the terms of the municipal act. in the present case, section 168 of the municipal act does not contain any non obstante clause so as to make the tenancy act inapplicable and nor does the act itself provide the method of basis for determining the annual value. this act has , therefore, to be read along with tenancy act of 1956 and it is the fair rent determinable under section 8(1)(d) which alone can be the annual value for the purposes of property tax."24. dealing with the m.p. municipal corporation act, 1956 the court held that the existence of n on obstante clause was crucial in determining the annual value. the court observed :"in section 168 of the municipal act with which were concerned in the present case the non obstante clause is not there. the municipal act is different from the m.p. municipal act, 1956. section 163 of the municipal act is similar to the corresponding provisions in delhi and in andhra pradesh and therefore, it is the ratio of the decisions of padma debi manu/sc/0284/1961manu/sc/0284/1961 : [1962]3scr49 : [1962]3scr49 , dewan daulat raj 1980 scc 685 and guntur municipal council manu/sc/0394/1970manu/sc/0394/1970 : [1971]2scr423 : [1971]2scr423 which should apply."25. in government servant cooperative's case (supra) this court dealt with section 116 of the delhi municipal corporation act providing for determination of rate able value of land or building assessable to property taxes and held that where there is a legislation fixing the standard rent of the premises, the rent at which premises could be reasonable expected to be let cannot exceed the statutory ceiling. but where there is no statutory control on rent which is charged, the annual rent actually received by the landlord shall be the basis for determining the rate able value of the property. it held:"therefore, the annual rent actually received by the landlord, in the absence of any special circumstances, would be a good guide to decide the rent which the landlord might reasonably expect to receive from a hypothetical tenant. since the premises in the present case are not controlled by any rent control legislation, the annual rent received by the landlord is what a willing lessee, uninfluenced by other circumstances, would pay to a willing lessor. hence, actual annual rent, in these circumstances, can be taken as the annual rate able value of the property for the assessment of property tax. the municipal corporation is therefore, entitled to revise the rate able value of the proprieties which have been freed from rent control on the basis of annual rent actually received unless the owner satisfies the municipal corporation that there are other considerations which have affected the quantum of rent."26. a perusal of various judgments, relied upon by the learned counsel for the parties, clearly shows that this court has taken a consistent view regarding the determination of annual value of land or building of the purposes of determination of taxes under the municipal acts. on the basis of various statues relating to the determination of the annual value for the purposes of municipal act, this court has devised two distinct groups. one such group deals with the municipal laws of some states which do not expressly exclude application of rent restrictions acts in the matter of determination of annual value of a building for the purposes of levying municipal taxes and the other group deals with the municipal laws which expressly exclude application of the rent restriction act in the matter of determination of annul value of land or building on rental method. whereas in the first category of cases the determination of annual value has to be made on the basis of fair or standard rent notwithstanding the actual rent, even if it exceeds the statutory limits. in the other group where the restriction in the rent act has been excluded, the determination of annual value of building on rental method is referable to the method provided under the relevant municipal act. whereas the padma debi's case, lic's case, guntur town rate payee's case, dewan daulat rai's case (supra) deal with the first group of municipal laws , the cases in ratanprabha's case, agm, central bank of india's case, east india commercial company's case, balbir singh's case, india oil corporation's case and srikant's case (supra) deal with the second group. as already noticed , this court in lic's case dealt with the first category as in section 168 of the calcutta municipal corporation act, there existed no non-obstante clause. the observations of the bench of this court which dealt with the case on 10th october, 2001 cannot be taken in isolation.27. justice shah, j. in lic's case referring to the proviso to section 168(1) of the calcutta municipal corporation act which dealt with the land and building, the standard rent of which had been fixed under section 9 of the west bengal premises rent control (temporary provisions) act, 1950 observe :"by the addition of the proviso, in our judgment, the meaning of the expression "gross rent at which the land or building might reasonably be expected to let" is not altered. in the present case, there is no order of the controller fixing standard rent under section 9 of the west bengal premises rent control (temporary provisions) act, 1950, but the standard rent stands determined by the definition of that expression in section 2(1)(b) of that act, which provides (omitting paras not relevant):"standard rent" in relation to any premises means -(a) xxx(b) where the rent has been fixed under section 9, the rent so fixed, or at which it would have been fixed if application were made under the said section."28. as already noticed even without specific determination, the standard rent was held to have been statutorily determined under section 2(10)(b) of the rent act. upon analysis of the various municipal laws and the judgments of this court it is held that in cases where the municipal laws excludes the applicability of the rent acts by incorporating on obstante clause in the taxing statute, the powers of the authorities under the municipal acts are not circumscribed by the limits indicated in padma debi's case and followed in that group of cases. in cases were the fair rent payable by the tenant has been determined and there is no justification for refusing to accept that fair rent as rental value of the premises, the municipal authorities should generally accept the standard rent fixed, notwithstanding the non applicability of the rent acts because such a view would be reasonable guideline to determine the rate of rent at which such land or building might, at the time of assessment, be reasonably expected to let from year to year. the rent which the tenant is receiving from his sub-tenant is also an important statutory consideration for determining the rent at the time of assessment to which the property might reasonably be expected to be let from year to year. such a consideration is also justified on the principles of reasonableness. we cannot agree that in all cases, notwithstanding the non-obstante clause the annual rental value cannot be fixed beyond the standard rent determined or determinable under the rent statute. we also find it difficult to hold that in all cases the rent actually paid by the sub-tenant to the tenant be taken as a sole criterion for determining the annual value on the assumption that such land or building might , at the time of assessment, is reasonably expected to get the aforesaid amount of rent if let from year to year. the argument that the rent actually received by the owner should always be deemed to be reasonable rent in the absence of fraud, collusion and other extraneous considerations is to general and broad proposition of law which cannot be accepted for the purposes of determining the annual value of the property for the purposes of section 174 of the 1980 act. in the light of clear and unambiguous provisions of section 174 of the 1980 act, it cannot be held that the amount realised by a tenant from a sub-tenant cannot, at all be taken into consideration for the purposes of determining the gross annual rent in the absence of extraneous considerations. there is no substance in the submission of the learned counsel appearing for the appellant that allowing the municipal corporations to assess the annual rate able value on the basis of the income of a tenant from the property would be grossly unfair and would have the effect of rendering the rate provisions of the act unreasonable, arbitrary and unconstitutional. the act itself has taken care by making sufficient provision in sections 193 and 194 regarding the liability to pay the rent and apportionment of such liability when the premises are assessed , let or sub-let. on proof of creation of sub-tenancy, the owner of the building may also be entitled to seek eviction of their tenants under the relevant provisions of the rent acts applicable in the state where the land or property is located. we find some substance in the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant that permitting the municipal authorities to assess the annual value only on the basis of the rent paid by the sub- tenant to the tenant and fixing its liability on the owner may adversely affect the owners of the buildings who have let their premises at a time when rents were meagre and who under the rent control statutes are deprived of getting possession back of the lands and buildings from their tenants . the 1980 act, therefore, requires the application of mind by the municipal authorities to determine the rent son the basis of the reasonableness by keeping into account all relevant circumstances including the actual rent received by the owner, hypothetical standard rent, the rent being received by the tenant from his sub-tenant and other relevant consideration, such as prevalent rate of rent of lands and building in the vicinity of the property being assessed . only because the owner of the building is not getting the same rent which the sub-tenant is paying to his lessor, cannot be made a basis to deprive the corporations from determining the annual valuation and taxing the land or building on that basis. if such a plea is accepted, it would be against he provisions of the state which has been enacted to provide civic services in the form of water drainage, sewage, collection, removal and disposal of solid waste, fire prevention and fire safety maintenance of street and public places, etc., in the municipal area when such land or building is situate.29. we do not find any conflict in the judgments of this court, so far as the determination of annual value of the property under the municipal laws is concerned. distinction , if any, is based upon the relevant provision of the state of a state with which this court was dealing,particularly with respect to such statutes which contained a non obstante clause. we are of the view that the basis for determination of annual rent value has to be the standard rent where the rent control act is applicable and in all other cases reasonable determination of such rent by the municipal authorities keeping in view various factors as indicated herein earlier, including the rent which the tenant is getting from his sub-tenant. in appropriate cases the owner of the property may be in a position to satisfy the authorities that the gross annual rent of the building of which the annual valuation was being determined cannot be more than the actual rent received by such owner from his tenant . the municipal authorities shall keep in mind the various pronouncements of this court, the statutory provisions made in the specified municipal acts, keeping in mind the applicability or non-applicability of the rent act and the peculiar circumstances of each case, to find out the gross annual rent of the building including service charges, if any, at which such land or building might, at the time of assessment , be reasonably expected to let from year to year in terms of section 174 of the 1980 act.30. keeping in view the facts of the present appeal we are of the opinion that the high court was right in remanding the appeals to the appellate tribunal for deciding on merits but was not justified to restrict the consideration only on the basis of rent being paid by the sub-tenant to the tenant for the purposes of determining the gross annual value. the appellate tribunal shall consider the appeals in the light of our judgment by keeping in mind all the circumstances including the rent actually received by the owner of the building and the rent being paid to the tenant by his sub-tenant. the appellate tribunal shall also keep in mind the peculiar circumstances of the case, if any, for determining the gross annual rent at which the building in controversy, at the time of assessment, is reasonably expected to let from year to year leas the allowances and other considerations referred to in section 174 of the 1980 act. if the annual valuation determined is more than the gross annual rent which the appellant is actually receiving from his tenant, the appellant shall be at liberty to recover the excess amount paid in terms of section 194 of the 1980 act.31. with these observations the appeal is disposed of costs to abide by the ultimate result.
kurian joseph, j.1. on 17.08.2016, it was recorded on the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant that the state commission had not taken up the true-up issue for the last more than eight years. therefore, a limited notice on the above submission was issued.2. the learned counsel for the commission submits that the true-up issue has not been taken up by the commission on account of pendency of civil appeal no. 4881 of 2010. it is not in dispute that there is no stay on the true-up issue in the said c.a. no. 4881 of 2010.3. however, the learned counsel for the commission submits that in case the said civil appeal is allowed, it may have some impact on the true-up issue in later years. we do not find any justification for the above apprehension. the commission should take up the true-up issue and decide it making the decision subject to the result of civil appeal no. 4881 of 2010.4. therefore, this appeal is disposed of with a direction to respondent no. 1 -jharkhand state electricity regulatory commission to take up the true-up issue and pass the required orders within a period of six months from today.5. however, the commission is free to make the decision subject to the result of civil appeal no. 4881 of 2010 in case the said civil appeal is not disposed of before the said period.no costs.
s.b. sinha, j.1. the effect of the recommendations of a committee of two judges as regards criteria for grant of selection scale appointed by an acting chief justice which have subsequently been approved by a full court of the high court is in question in these appeals which arise out of a judgment and order passed by a division bench of rajasthan high court dated 23rd november, 2000 in d.b. civil writ petitions no 671 of 2000, 987 of 2000 and 1263 of 2000.2. the high court of rajasthan in exercise of its power conferred upon it under section 46 of the rajasthan high court ordinance 1949 read with article 225 of the constitution of india and all other powers enabling it in that behalf made rules known as rules of the high court of judicature for rajasthan, 1952 (hereinafter called and referred to as "the rules").3. the rules came into force on or about 1st october, 1952 chapter 3 of the rules refers to administrative business of the high court.4. the rules of the high court were amended by a resolution of the full court of the high court on 26.11.1966 and the relevant portion of the minutes thereof are as under:-"minutes of the proceedings of the full court meeting held on saturday, the 26th november, 1966, at 11 a.m. in the chamber of the hon'ble the chief justice.***agendai. amendment in the high court rules relating to the administrative business of the court.ii. any other matter which hon'ble the chief justice may like to be discussed.decisions:item no. ii:-the amendments proposed by the hon'ble administrative judge in chapter iii of the high court rules relating to the administrative and executive business of the court were considered.resolved that in exercise of the powers conferred by section 46 of the rajasthan high court ordinance, 1949, and articles 225, 227, 223, 234 and 235 of the constitution of india and all other powers enabling the court in that behalf, the following change sand amendments in chapter iii of the high court rules relating to the administrative and executive business of the court be effected:-1. the words "executive and" occurring in the heading of chapter iii shall be omitted:2. for rules 14 to 22 the following rules shall be substituted:-"14. administrative business relating to control over subordinate courts and to superintendent over courts and tribunals.--all administrative business of the court relating to the control over subordinate courts vested in the court under article 235 of the constitution or otherwise and to the superintendence over the courts and tribunals vested in the court under article 227 of the constitution or otherwise shall be disposed of as provided hereinafter.15. matters on which all judges shall be consulted.--on the following matters all the judges of the court shall be consulted, namely:-(c) proposals as to changes in or the issue of new rules for the guidance of subordinate courts;(d) appointment promotion and seniority of judicial offices;(e) withholding of promotion, supersession or reduction of judicial officers;(f) removal or dismissal of any judicial officer;(g) compulsory retirement of judicial officers otherwise than by way of punishment;(h) important questions of policy or those affecting the powers and status of the court laid before the court by the chief justice or any other judge;(l) any matter which the chief justice of the administrative committee, as constituted under rule 16, may consider fit to be laid before them for consideration.16. administrative committee.--(1) a committee of judges shall be formed composed of the chief justice the administrative judge and such other judge or judges as the chief justice may, from time to time, appoint. this committee shall be called the administrative committee.(2) subject to these rules, the administrative committee shall act for the court in its administrative business in respect of the matters enumerated in rule 17.17. matters on which the administrative committee shall be consulted. the administrative committee shall be consulted on the following matters, namely:--(a) the issue of general letters to subordinate courts;(b) the issue of directions regarding the preparation of returns and statements; and(c) any other matter which the chief justice or the administrative judge may desire to be brought before it.18. consultation how made.--the consultation with the judges and the administrative committee, referred to in rule 15 and 17 respectively shall be made either by circulating the papers connected with the matter among the judges or the administrative committee as the case may be or by laying the matter before a meeting of the judges or the administrative committee called by the chief justice.19. decision in case difference of opinion.-- all the matters referred to in rules 15 and 17 shall be disposed of in accordance with the views of the majority and in case the judges, including the chief justice are equally divided in accordance with the views of the chief justice.20. administrative business to be disposed of by the chief justice.--subject to rules 15 and 17, the administrative business referred to in rule 14 shall be disposed of by the chief justice.21. appointment of administrative judge and allocation of work.--(1) the chief justice shall appoint a judge to carry on the general administration of the court. such judge shall be called the administrative judge and shall dispose of the administrative business in accordance with rule 22.(2) the chief justice may also, by a general or special order, allocate specified business for disposal to any other judge or a committee of judges, and such judge or committee of judges shall dispose of the same, subject to any special direction of the chief justice."26. papers to be submitted to the chief justice after circulation.--after any papers have been circulated for opinion, they shall be submitted again to the chief justice who shall examine the matter and issue orders in accordance with rule 19.""29. quorum.--the quorum necessary for the transaction of business shall be not less than two-third of the members in the case of a meeting of the administrative committee and not less than one-half of the judges in the case of a judges meeting:--1. the existing rule 32 shall be renumbered as sub-rule (1) of that rule, and the following new sub-rule (2) shall be added:-"(2) for the removal of doubt, it is hereby mentioned that all administrative work disposed of by the chief justice the administrative judge or any other judge or judges to whom the work has been assigned by the chief justice for disposal shall be deemed to be disposed of by the court."rule 32 of the said rules is as under:32. effect of any irregularity in or omission to follow the procedure laid down in this chapter:-(1) no irregularity in or omission to follow, the procedure laid down in this chapter shall affect the validity of any order passed or anything done under these rules.(2) for the removal of doubt, it is hereby mentioned that all administrative work disposed of by the chief justice, the administrative judge or any other judge or judges to whom the work has been assigned by the chief justice for disposal shall be deemed to be disposed of by the court.5. on or about 17.1.1969 rajasthan higher judicial service rules, 1969 came into being which inter alia contained a provision relating to grant of selection scale in terms of rule 23 thereof which reads as under:--"appointments to posts in the selection grade:- appointments to the posts in the selection grade of the service shall be made by the governor in consultation with the court on the basis of merit."6. on or about 30th of april, 1990 a committee of two hon'ble judges of the said court was constituted by the full court for the purpose of consideration of individual merit of the judicial officers of rajasthan higher judicial service (rhjs) relating to appointment to selection scale. pursuant to or in furtherance thereof a committee of two judges considered the same and suggested that last five years of acrs to be considered in the merit criteria therefore. however, the full court by resolution dated 5th october, 1990 took a decision to take into consideration three good acrs out of five acrs only for the said purpose. as regards grant of super time scale to rajasthan judicial service the full court of the high court by a resolution dated 14.8.1997 adopted the criteria of five good acrs out of seven acrs for grant of supertime scale.7. the acting chief justice of the high court, however, constituted a committee consisting of two judges of the said court to consider examine and to make recommendations for formation of officiating promottee rhjs officers for their substantive appointment in their service and for promotion of rhjs officers in the ordinary scale to selection scale by an order dated 26th march, 1998. the committee submitted its report on 30th march, 1998, upon considering the cases of all eligible candidates in the light of the existing rules as also the full court resolutions. with a view to arrive at its finding, the committee, however, found those officers fit and meritorious for grant of selection grade who obtained at least five outstanding very good good acrs out of seven and where no adverse entry was recorded. as regards those, whose acrs have not been recorded for one reason of the other, the committee deferred consideration of their cases for the time being. the committee, however filed an additional report on 27.4.1999 whose cases were deferred earlier.8. the matter was placed before the full court on 30th april, 1999 by the chief justice. twenty hon'ble judges of the high court participated therein. by resolution dated 30th april, 1999, the full court considered the report submitted by the said two judges committee and approved the name of 26 officers who were found fit for grant of selection scale. the cases of the respondents herein along with four others, however, were deferred. the matter relating to the additional report of the said two judges committee was again placed before the full court on 27-11-1999. it accepted the report of the committee and declined to grant selection scale to the respondents herein. pursuant to or in furtherance of the aforementioned recommendations made by the high court, the governor by a notification dated 5.2.2000 made appointment to the officers of higher judicial service named therein to the post of selection grade with effect from the date mentioned against their names respectively.9. the first respondent in each of these appeals filed writ petitions questioning non-grant of selection grade to them by filing writ petitions before the jaipur bench of the rajasthan high court.10. by reason of the impugned judgment the high court inter alia held:(1) the acting chief justice was not authorised to constitute the two judges committee, and, thus, it could not make lay down any merit criteria.(2) as all the judges of the high court have not been consulted, the committee appointed by the acting chief justice alone could not evolve the merit criteria in view of sub-rule (h) of rule 15 of 1952 rules.(3) the earlier policy decision adopted by the full court could not be changed as rule 15 of 1952 provides for prior consultation of the judges of the high court and as all judges were not consulted in the matter subsequent approval thereof could not cure illegality.11. the said writ petitions were disposed of with the following directions:-(i) we direct the respondents to consider the cases of all the three petitioners afresh against the vacancies occasioned in 1998 and 1999 in view of the merit criterion evolved and approved by the full court in the year 1990 and 1994. if they are found eligible for promotion to selection scale of the rhjs, they can be accorded the selection scale by creating supernumerary posts in terms of rule 18 of the rajasthan service rules.(ii) this decision shall not affect the order dated february 5, 2000 whereby selection scale of the rhjs was granted to twenty six officers.(iii) the fresh consideration as directed above is expected to be done as expeditiously as possible, in the meanwhile three posts in the selection scale of the rhjs shall be kept vacant.however, it was observed:"it is however, made clear that though we have declared the entire exercise of the respondents in granting selection scale as illegal yet we do not intend to unsettle the grant of selection scale to twenty six judicial officers as they are not before us. we, therefore, direct that this decision shall not affect the order dated february 5, 2000 of the respondent whereby selection scale was granted to twenty six judicial officers. but if the petitioners, after consideration of their service record from 1993 to 1997 and from 1994 to 1998 are found eligible for selection scale they shall be considered with reference to the selection of 1998 and 1999 when their junior colleagues were promoted. the petitioners in that event can be accorded the selection scale of the rhjs by creating supernumerary posts in terms of rule 18 of the rajasthan service rules."12. learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, would submit that having regard to the provisions of the rules, the high court must be held to have committed an error in holding that the acting chief justice had no jurisdiction to constitute the committee. it was contended that once it is held that the acting chief justice had the jurisdiction to constitute a committee and the decision of the said committee was approved by the full court, the earlier policy decision must be held to have been varied by the high court. the learned counsel in support of the said contentions has placed strong reliance in state of uttar pradesh v. batuk deo pati tripathi and anr. manu/sc/0363/1978manu/sc/0363/1978 : 1978crilj839 , brij nath pandey v state of u.p. and ors., registrar high court of madras v. r. rajiah manu/sc/0411/1988manu/sc/0411/1988 : air1988sc1388 .13. mr. surya kant, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the first respondent in each case, would, on the other hand, submit that as the power of the chief justice to constitute a committee is governed by a statutory rule, he must be held to have acted without jurisdiction in appointing the said committee. strong reliance in support of the said contention has been placed in orissa small industries corporation ltd. and anr. v. narasingha charan mohanty and ors. manu/sc/0781/1998manu/sc/0781/1998 : (1999)illj298sc .14. the term 'chief justice' will include the judges authorised to act on his behalf in view of the interpretation clause contained in section 3, chapter iii of the rules provides for administrative business of the court. in terms of rule 14 of the rules, administrative business of the court relating to control over subordinate courts vested either under article 235 or 227 of the constitution of india were to be disposed of as provided therein.15. the rules have been made by the high court. the high court, therefore, can also amend the rules. it is not the case of the writ petitioners-first respondents herein that the high court had no jurisdiction to evolve the criteria for grant of selection scale to the officers of the rajasthan judicial service or rajasthan higher judicial service. it may be true that by reason of resolution dated 5th october, 1990 the full court inter alia opined that for the purpose of grant of selection scale three good acrs out of five acrs were to be taken into consideration but the said decision of the full court was subject to amendment modification thereof.16. a reading of the aforementioned rules clearly goes to show that the chief justice has the requisite jurisdiction to constitute a committee and the report of the committee upon consultation of all the judges of the high court in terms of rule 15 shall become a decision of the court. rule 29(2) and rule 32 as quoted (supra) also clearly show that even no irregularity which might have taken place in the procedure laid down in chapter iii shall not affect the validity of the order passed or anything done in the rules and the same shall be deemed to be disposed of by the court. the legal fiction created must also be given its full effect.17. it is beyond any pale of controversy that the control over the subordinate courts within the meaning of article 235 of the constitution of india is that of the high court. such control of the high court includes general superintendence of the working of the subordinate courts, disciplinary control over the presiding officers, disciplinary proceedings, transfer confirmation and promotion and appointment etc. such control vested in the high court in complete. [see high court of judicature for rajasthan v. ramesh chand paliwal manu/sc/0137/1998manu/sc/0137/1998 : (1999)illj885sc , district judges baradakanta mishra v. high court of orissa manu/sc/0538/1976manu/sc/0538/1976 : air1976sc1899 , high court of punjab v. state of haryana, manu/sc/0072/1975manu/sc/0072/1975 : [1975]3scr365 , yoginath d. bagde v. state of maharashtra manu/sc/0583/1999manu/sc/0583/1999 : air1999sc3734 , state of haryana v. inder prakash anand, manu/sc/0547/1976manu/sc/0547/1976 : air1976sc1841 and state of assam v. s.n. sen manu/sc/0686/1971manu/sc/0686/1971 : [1972]2scr251 ].18. it is also true that the powers of the chief justice under articles 235 and 229 of the constitution of india are different and distinct. whereas control over the subordinate courts vests in the high court as a whole, the control over the high court vests in the chief justices only. [see all india judges association v. union of india manu/sc/0039/1992manu/sc/0039/1992 : (1993)illj723sc ]. however, the same does not mean that a full court cannot authorise the chief justice in respect of any matter whatsoever. in relation to certain matters keeping the rest of it in itself by the full court, authorization to act on its behalf in favour of the chief justice on a committee of judges is permissible in law. how far and to what extent such power has been or can be delegated would be discernible only from the rules. such a power by the full court can also be exercised from time to time.19. the judges of the rajasthan high court, as noticed hereinbefore, in terms of sub-rule (2) of rule 21 of the rules authorised the chief justice to constitute a committee. such constitution of the committee by the chief justice having been made in terms of the rules must be held to have been made by the high court itself. such authorization is not a limited one as thereby the extent to which such authorization an be exercised has not been spelt out. furthermore, authorization in terms of sub-rule (2) of rule 21 of the rules having been laid down in chapter ii which relates to the administrative business of the court, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever even in the matter of control of the high court in terms of article 235 of the constitution of india, the chief justice of the high court had the jurisdiction to exercise the said power.20. once such a resolution authorising the chief justice to constitute a committee has been passed having regard to the decision of this court in the high court of judicature of bombay v. shirish kumar rangrao patil manu/sc/0692/1997manu/sc/0692/1997 : [1997]3scr1131 , there cannot be doubt whatsoever that the exercise of power by the chief justice in that behalf was absolutely valid. it is, therefore, not correct to contend that the chief justice could appoint the two-judges committee only with the approval of the full court.21. exercise of power by the chief justice, however, indisputably must be made in terms of the rules. the questions raised in these appeals must, therefore, be considered from that angle.22. the high court in our opinion, therefore, clearly erred in arriving at the aforementioned finding that the constitution of the committee was illegal.23. the submission on behalf of the respondents to the effect that in the matter relating to fixation of criteria for the purpose of appointment to the selection grade the two-judges committee could not be made without consulting all the judges is stated to be rejected. the said submission is based on a total misconception. laving down the merit criteria for appointment to the selection grade also was within the domain of the high court. it could not only lay down such criteria but also amend or modify the same from time to time. for the said purpose also the chief justice could appoint a committee, the recommendation whereof was to be subject to the approval of the full court. rule 15 of the rules does not say that before an action can be initiated in that behalf by the chief justice all the judges are to be consulted. rule 15 of the rules postulates a final decision in the matter specified therein and not initiation of process therefore.24. it is also incorrect to contend that all the judges of the high court are required to be consulted at a time.25. the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents is again not correct in contending that the two-judges committee was not justified in evolving a merit criteria different from the one approved by the full court. the two-judges committee did not take any final decision in that behalf. it having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and upon consideration of the extant rules as well as the earlier decisions of the full court applied certain principles and criteria which inevitably was subjected to approval of the full court.26. the procedure for holding a full court meeting as quoted supra would clearly show that the meeting which had requisite quorum as contemplated under rule 29 would amount to compliance of the rules.27. although rule 15 provides that all the judges shall be consulted in the matters enumerated therein but rule 18 provides for the mode and manner thereof.28. if such consultation is to be made by circulation, undoubtedly, the relevant documents are required to be circulated to all the judges. in the event, however, such consultation is to be effected by placing the matter before a full court all the judges are therefore invited but the same would not mean that in the event, one or more judge(s) does do not attend the full court, the resolution passed by it shall be invalid. rule 29 provides for a quorum. in the case of a meeting of the judges of the court, the quorum will be complete if one-half or more of the judges attend the same. consultation with all the judges would, thus, not mean that even if some of the judges do not choose to make themselves available in a full court meeting, consultation with all the judges shall not be complete.29. we may notice that even in the full court meeting held on 26th november, 1966 all the hon'ble judges of the high court were not present.30. the committee was constituted for the purpose of considering the cases of concerned officers. it is not and cannot be the case or the contention of the writ petitions that even for the purpose of considering the case of the eligible judicial officers at the threshold, it was absolutely necessary to place the matter before the full court. the acting chief justice constituted the committee for a specific purpose. the committee merely submitted its opinion which was subject to approval by the full court. once the opinion of the matter is approved by the full court, in our opinion, it must be held that there had been a compliance of rule 15 of the rules.31. interpretation of a statute depends upon the text and context thereof. a statute should be interpreted having regard to the purpose and object for which the same was made. the chief justice of a high court although first amongst the judges, by the nature of office he holds, he is the head of the state judiciary. authorisation by the full court in favour of the chief justice to constitute a committee and/or take actions for the subordinate judiciary must be viewed from that context. rule 15 of the rules provides for such matters which require consultations with the other judges of the high court.32. question of consultation with the judges would not arise unless the subject matter therefore is identified. it is for hon'ble the chief justice of the high court to identify such matters and place the same before the full court with relevant papers and documents.33. it is, therefore, axiomatic that not only the chief justice of high court was tree to initiate any proceedings and obtain the opinion of a committee of judges on such matters and the only legal requirement therefore is to place such proposals together with the opinion of the committee before the judges of the high court so that the matter can be fully thrashed out. once the full court approves the recommendations made by the committee of judges, it becomes decision of the court which could be sent to the governor for acting thereupon.34. an almost identical question came up for consideration whether the high court can delegate its power to a judge or a shall committee of the judges of the court so as to authorise it to act on this behalf in state of uttar pradesh v. batuk deo pati tripathi and anr. (supra). in no uncertain terms it would held:--"...the control vested in the high courts by that article comprehends, according to our decisions, a large variety of matters like transfers, subsequent postings, leave, promotions other than initial promotions imposition of minor penalties which do not fall within article 311, decisions regarding compulsory retirements, recommendations for imposition of major penalties which fall within article 311, entries in character rolls and so forth. if every judge is to be associated personally and directly with the decision on every one of these mattes, several important matters pertaining to the high court's administrative affairs will pile into arrears like court arrears. in fact, it is no exaggeration to say that the control will be better and more effectively exercised if a smaller committee of judges has the authority of the court to consider the manifold matters falling within the purview of article 235. bearing in mind therefore the nature of the power which that article confers on the high court, we are of the opinion that it is wrong to characterize as 'delegation' the process whereby the entire high court authorises a judge or some of the judges of the court to act on behalf of the whole court. such an authorization effectuates the purpose of article 235 and indeed without it the control vested in the high court over the subordinate courts will tend gradually to become lax and ineffective. administrative functions are only a part, though an important part of the high court's constitutional functions. judicial functions ought to occupy and do in fact consume the best part of a judge's time. for balancing these two-fold functions it is inevitable that the administrative duties should be left to be discharged by some on behalf of all the judges. judicial functions brook no such sharing of responsibilities by any instrumentality."35. in registrar high court of madras v. r. rajiah (supra), it was observed:"23. in rajiah's case a review committee consisting of three judges was appointed by a resolution of the high court. in the meeting of the review committee held on june 25, 1979 to consider the case of the respondent rajiah, only two judges of the high court were present. the two judges came to the conclusion that the respondent. rajiah, should be compulsorily retired with effect from april 2, 1980. the division bench found that the third judge had no notice of the meeting held on june 25, 1979, but he agreed with the view expressed by the two judges with a slight modification that the respondent would retire with effect from march 3, 1980 under rule 56(d) of the fundamental rules. the division bench of the high court took the view that as all the three judges had not sat together and considered the question of compulsory retirement of respondent rajiah and that, further the third judge having also modified the decision of the two judges, namely, that the respondent would be compulsorily retired with effect from march 3, 1980, the impugned order of compulsory retirement of the respondent, rajiah, was vitiated. it is true that the members of the review committee should sit together and consider the question of compulsory retirement, but simply because one of them did not participate in the meeting and subsequently agreed with the view expressed by the other two judges, it would not vitiate the decision of the committee to compulsorily retire the respondent. the third judge might (sic not) be justified in correcting the date with effect from which the respondent would compulsorily retire, but that is a very minor issue and would not, in our opinion, make the decision invalid.24. in regard to the case of the other respondent, namely. k. rajeswaran, the high court took the view that the constitution of the review committee by the chief judge and not by the full court was illegal. we are unable to accept the view of the high court. we fail to understand why the chief justice cannot appoint a review committee or an administrative committee. but in one respect the high court is, in our opinion correct, namely, that the decision of the review committee should have been placed before a meeting of the judges. in the case of the respondent, k. rajeswaran, the decision and recommendation of the review committee was not placed before the full court meeting. nor is there any material to show that the same was circulated to the judges. in that sense, the recommendation of the review committee was not strictly legal."36. furthermore, the terminology 'consultation' used in rule 15 having regard to purport and object thereof must be given its ordinary meaning. in words and phrases (permanent edition, 1960, volume 9, page 3) to 'consult' is defined as 'to discuss something together, to deliberate'. corpus juris secundum (volume 16a, ed. 1956, page 1242) also says that the word 'consult' is frequently defined as meaning to discuss something together, or to deliberate. by giving an opportunity to consultation or deliberation the purpose thereof is to enable the judges to make their respective points of view known to the others and discuss and examine the relative merits of their view. it is neither in doubt nor in dispute that the judges present in the meeting of the full court were supplied with all the requisite documents and had full opportunity to deliberate upon the agenda in question.37. there is another aspect of the matter which may require consideration. for all intent and purport the report of the two judges committee has been approved by the full court. once approved, it terminated into a decision of the full court itself. in the instant case even the governor has acted upon the recommendations of the high court. the writ petitioners-first respondents herein did not question the appointments of the appointees not the high court. thus, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that for all intent and purport the opinion of the two judges committee received approval at the hands of the full court.38. the high court, in our opinion, further committed a manifest error in arriving at its conclusion in so far as it failed to take into consideration that rule 15 does not postulate the prior approval of the full court in relation to any action which may be initiated by the chief justice.39. when an approval is required, an action holds goods. only if it disapproved it losses its force. only when a permission is required, the decision does not become effective till permission is obtained. (see u.p. avas evam vikas parishad and anr. v. friends coop housing society ltd and anr. manu/sc/0024/1996manu/sc/0024/1996 : [1995]3scr729 . in the instant case both the aforementioned requirements have been fulfilled.40. there is another aspect of the matter. in terms of rule 2(2) of the rules, the decision of the full court would have a retrospective effective and retrospective operation.41. in any view of the matter, even in a case where the initial action is illegal, the same can be ratified by a body competent therefore. this aspect of the matter has not been considered by the high court at all. in sir parmeshwari prasad gupta v. the union of india manu/sc/0395/1973manu/sc/0395/1973 : [1974]1scr304 this court held:"...even if it be assumed that the telegram and the letter terminating the services of the appellant by the chairman was in pursuance to the invalid resolution of the board of directors passed on december 16, 1953 to terminate his services, it would not follow that the action of the chairman could not be ratified in a regularly convened meeting of the board of directors. the point is that even assuming that the chairman was not legally authorised to terminate the services of the appellant, he was acting on behalf of the company in doing so, because, he purported to act in pursuance of the invalid resolution. therefore, it was open to a regularly constituted meeting of the board of directors to ratify that action which, though unauthorized, was done on behalf of the company. ratification would always relate back to the date of the act ratified and so it must be held that the services of the appellant were validly terminated on december 17, 1953..."42. (see also marathwada university v. seshrao balwant rao chavan manu/sc/0311/1989manu/sc/0311/1989 : (1989)iillj161sc , babu verghese and ors. v bar council of kerala and ors. manu/sc/0168/1999manu/sc/0168/1999 : [1999]1scr1121 and barnard v. national dock labour board (1953) 1 all er 1113).43. in orissa small industries corporation ltd. and anr. v. narasingha charan mohanty and ors. (supra) where upon the learned counsel has placed strong reliance this court held:"...that apart, the court is not entitled to assess the respective merit of the candidates for adjudging their suitability for being promoted and the only right the employee has is a right of consideration. the said right of consideration not having been infringed in the present case, the high court was not justified in issuing the impugned direction for reconsideration of his case..."44. the said decision, therefore, mutilates against the contentions of the respondents.45. furthermore, the first respondent herein in these cases shri p.p. singh, shri g.p. pandey has been granted selection scale in rhjs with effect from 1.8.2000 and shri p.k. bhatia has been given with effect from 29.3.2000. shri p.p. singh has also retired from service on superannuation.46. we are of the opinion that impugned judgment of the high court cannot be sustained which is set aside accordingly. the appeals are allowed but in the facts and circulation of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
d.m. dharmadhikari, j.1. "frailty thy name is woman", that is how in one of his plays shakespeare described one of the female characters in his play. this description is more and more in evidence particularly in rural indian society where married woman, who are unable to muster courage to fight against cruelty and harassment meted out to them by their spouses and family members, find no escape other than ending their own life.2. the deceased krishna kumari, second daughter of pw1 was married to yadla srinivasa rao (hereinafter referred to as accused no. 1), on 26.6.1988. accused no. 1 was employed as branch post master in the village where the spouses lived jointly with the parents of accused no. 1.3. at the time of marriage father of the deceased, who was a teacher, gave a cash dowry of rupees fifteen thousand and jewels wroth fifteen thousand besides gift of five acres of land and a house site in the course of marriage ritual described as "pasupukumkuma." it is explained that this gift of land was in the nature of 'stridhana' given to the bride by the father for her maintenance.4. after three or four months of the marriage accused no. 1, husband of the deceased started demanding from the deceased execution of a deed in his favour of the land and house site gifted to her. refusal on the part of the deceased to meet the demand was the cause of her continuous harassment. taking advantage of his position as the post master in the village, accused no. 1 never delivered mail sent to the deceased by her father and her sister nagamani. her younger sister after passing tenth class examination had to appear for polytechnic entrance test. as a part of harassment of the deceased, accused no. 1 did not deliver the entrance card received from kakatiya university addressed to the younger sister of the deceased which resulted in the former losing the admission to the test.5. the deceased somebody was able to lay her hand on the letters addressed to her and which had been concealed by accused no. 1. on finding those letters, she handed over the same to her father. this incident led to extreme point of harassment. accused no. 1 and his parents, accused nos. 2-3, drove the deceased out from their house with stern warning to her to restore those letters. this incident of cruelty was so grave and unbearable that she committed suicide by consuming a poisonous insecticide endo-sulphan on 22.10.1989, pw4, who had witnessed the incident of the deceased having been driven out of the house the previous day, also saw accused no. 1 taking deceased to the hospital at madhira. pw4 informed about it to father (pw1) of the deceased who rushed to the house of the accused to find krishna kumari, dead. the father then lodged a first information report, ex.p1 within eight hours on the same day.6. all the three accused were charged in session case no. 157 of 1999 by the court of assistant sessions judge, nuzwid for offence of dowry death under section 304b, ipc and in the alternative under section 498a, ipc for cruelty and harassment of such magnitude as to drive the deceased to commit suicide. the prosecution examined the parents of the deceased of pw 1-2, pw 3-4 were examined who had seen the deceased being driven out of the house and taken back only on their persuasion.7. the trial court by judgment dated 19.8.1991 accepted the evidence led by the prosecution of alleged cruel treatment and harassment of the deceased which drove her to commit suicide. it, however, held that on the evidence only reference under section 498a, ipc is made out. it acquitted them of the offence under section 304b, ipc. the three accused on their conviction for offence under section 498a were sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for two years and a fine of rs. 500/- each. in default of payment of fine, they were sentenced to two months simple imprisonment each.8. the appellants i.e. parents of the deceased filed criminal revision no. 564/91 in the high court of andhra pradesh against the acquittal of the accused under section 304b, ipc. the accused preferred criminal appeal no. 1291/99 before the high court of andhra pradesh assailing their conviction and sentences.9. the learned single judge of the high court of andhra pradesh decided the revision preferred by the parents of the deceased and the appeal preferred by the accused by a common judgment dated 24.8.1994 which is the subject matter of these two separate criminal appeals preferred by the parents of the deceased and the state of andhra pradesh.10. the learned single judge of the high court of andhra pradesh dismissed the criminal revision filed by the parents of the deceased and confirmed the verdict of the trial court that the accused are liable to conviction and sentences only under section 498a, ipc and not under section 304b, ipc.11. by the same common judgment the high court allowed the appeal preferred by accused nos. 2-3 (parents of accused no. 1) and acquitted them of the alleged offences.12. against the common judgment of the high court, state of andhra pradesh has preferred criminal appeal nos. 1458-59 of 1995 challenging the acquittal of accused nos. 2-3 and the parents of the deceased have preferred connected criminal appeal no. 1457 of 1995 seeking conviction of all the accused under section 304b of the ipc.13. the high court in its common judgment passed in criminal appeal and criminal revision before it after appreciating the evidence led against accused nos. 2-3, has found that the allegation against them of their participation with accused no. 1 in driving out the deceased from their house was for the first time made by pw1-father of the deceased only in his deposition in the court. at no earlier point of time either in the first information report ex.p1 or in the statements made under section 161 of cr.p.c. to the police, such allegation was made against accused no. 2 and accused no. 3. apart from the oral testimony of pw1 (the father of the deceased) there is no other evidence on record to prove that the two accused nos. 2-3 joined accused no. 1 in harassing or cruelly treating the deceased. on appreciation of the evidence the conclusion drawn by the high court in favour of accused no. 2 and accused no. 3 is reasonable and does not justify interference by us in their acquittal. consequently, we uphold the acquittal of accused nos. 2-3 and dismiss the two appeals preferred by the state of andhra pradesh which are filed to seek their conviction.14. we now take up for consideration criminal appeal no. 1457 of 1995, preferred by the parents of the deceased seeking conviction of accused no. 1 for offence under section 304b of the indian penal code. in its common judgment after appreciating the evidence on record, the conclusion reached by the high court that the accused no. 1 cannot be convicted under section 304b, ipc appears to be legally sound. there is no evidence against accused no. 1 that at the time of marriage there was any demand or settlement for giving dowry in cash or by way of transfer of property. the father of the deceased pw1 has not stated that cash, ornaments and the land were given at the time of marriage pursuant to any demand of dowry by the parents of the husband. he merely states that according to the custom of the community declaration was made of gift of five acres of land to the deceased as he "stridhana" called in the community as pasupukumkuma. as promised and declared in the ritual at the time of marriage the land was transferred in the name of the wife. the couple lived happily thereafter. it is only 2-3 months thereafter that the husband started harassing the wife to force her to transfer the land to him this harassment or cruel treatment to pressurize her to transfer the land cannot be said to be 'in connection with any alleged dowry demand'. for the purposes of section 304b, ipc the legislature has borrowed the definition of 'dowry' from section 2 of the dowry prohibition act of 1961. the relevant provisions of the penal code, dowry prohibition act and evidence act are quoted hereunder:304-b dowry death - (1) where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death."explanation - for the purposes of this sub-section, "dowry" shall have the same meaning as in section 2 of the dowry prohibition act, 1961(2) whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life."section 2 of the dowry prohibition act, 1951 defines "dowry" as under:-2. definition of "dowry" - in this act, "dowry" means any property or valuable security given or agreed to be given either directly or indirectly -(a) by one party to a marriage to the other party to the marriage, or(b) by the parents of either party to a marriage or by any other person, to either party to the marriage or to any other person.at or before or any time after the marriage in connection with the marriage of said parties, but does not include dower or mahr in the case of persons to whom the muslim personal law (shariat) applies.explanation i - for the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any presents made at the time of a marriage to either party to the marriage in the form of cash, ornaments, clothes or other articles, shall not be deemed to be dowry within the meaning of this section, unless they are made as consideration for the marriage of the said parties.explanation ii - the expression 'valuable security' has the same meaning as in section 30 of the indian penal code.section 113b of the evidence act raises a presumption against the accused and reads:-113-b presumption as to dowry death - when the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the court shall be presume that such person had caused the dowry death.explanation - for the purpose of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same meaning as in section 304b of the indian penal code."15. the legal position firmly established is that 'suicidal death' of a married woman within seven years of her marriage is covered by the expression "death of a woman is caused ..... or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances" as used in section 304b of the indian penal code. see satvir singh v. state of punjab manu/sc/0588/2001manu/sc/0588/2001 : 2001crilj4625 .16. the evidence which has been found acceptable by the courts below against accused no. 1 is that the cruel treatment and harassment of the deceased by him led her to commit suicide which was a death "otherwise than under normal circumstances". to attract the provisions of section 304b ipc, one of the main ingredients of the offence which is required to be established is that "soon before her death" she was subjected to cruelty and harassment 'in connection with the demand for dowry'. there is no evidence on record to show that the land was demanded as a dowry. it was given by the father to the deceased in marriage ritual as pasupukumuma. the harassment or cruelty meted out to the deceased by the husband after the marriage to force her to transfer the land in his name was 'not in connection with any demand for dowry'. one of the main ingredients of the offence of "demand of dowry" being absent in this case, the high court cannot be said to have committed any error in acquitting accused no. 1 for offence under section 304b, ipc.17. we, however, find that the same evidence on record which was held reliable by convict accused no. 1 for offence of 'cruelty' under section 498a, ipc, clearly makes out a case for his conviction for offence of abetting suicide under section 306, ipc read with section 113a of the evidence act. section 498a (sic) cruelty by husband to wife as a punishable offence the word "cruelty" is defined in the explanation appended to the said section. section 498a with explanation thereunder reads thus:section 498a: "husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty - whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to find.explanation - for the purpose of this section, "cruelty" means -(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman, or(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her to any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to meet such demand."(underlining for emphasis)18. clause (a) of the explanation under section 498a, ipc defines cruelty to mean a 'wilful conduct of the husband of such nature as is likely to drive the women to commit suicide.' in the instant case, the accused pressurised and harassed the deceased to part with the land received by her from her father as "stridhana." as a method adopted for harassment the postal mail of her relatives sent to her was suppressed by the husband who was in a position to do so being a branch post master in the village. when the letters were discovered by the wife and she handed them over to her father (pw1) she was driven out of the house. this cruel conduct of the husband led the wife to commit suicide. the trial court and the high court were, therefore, perfectly justified on this evidence to hold accused no. 1 guilty of the offence of 'cruelty' under section 498a. as a result of such cruel treatment the wife was driven to commit suicide. thus offence of abetment of committing suicide punishable under section 306, ipc is clearly made out against accused no. 1 and for that purpose presumption under section 113a of the evidence act can be raised against him. section 306, ipc reads thus:"306. abetment of suicide - if any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine."113a. presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman - when the question is whether the commission of suicide by a woman had been abetted by her husband or any relative of her husband and it is shown that she had committed suicide within 6 period of seven years from the date of her marriage and that her husband or such relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the court may presume, having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had been abetted by her husband or by such relative of her husband.explanation - for the purposes of this section, "cruelty; shall have the same meaning as in section 498a of the indian penal code."(underlining for emphasis)19. both the courts below have found the husband guilty of cruel treatment of his wife and as a result the wife committed suicide within seven years of their marriage. on such evidence the presumption which arises under section 113a of the evidence act is that the husband abetted the suicide. the word "cruelty" as mentioned in the explanation below section 113a of the evidence act has been given the same meaning as contained in the explanation below section 498a, ipc. on the fact found, 'the wilful' conduct of the husband in forcing the deceased to part with her land which she had received in marriage as "stridhana" and for that purpose concealing her postal mail was so cruel that she was driven to commit suicide. a case of conviction and sentence of accused no. 1 under section 306, ipc has thus clearly been made out even though his acquittal for commission of the offence of 'dowry death' punishable under section 304b, ipc is not found liable to be disturbed.20. the learned counsel for the accused has argued that in the absence of a charge framed against the accused under section 306 ipc, the accused cannot be convicted under the said section.21. from the record we find that although a charge specifically under section 306 ipc was not framed but all facts and ingredients constituting that offence were mentioned in the statement of charges framed under section 498a and section 304b of ipc. the statement of charge framed by the trial courts reads thus:"that on or about the 22nd day of october, 1989, at your house at tunikipadu of gampalagudem mandal, yedla krishna kumari, wife of a-1 of you and daughter-in-law of a2 and a-3 among you, committed suicide by consuming poison, and that you all subjected her to such cruelty and harassment as did drive her to commit suicide, with the object of extracting ac.5-00 of land as dowry to a-1 and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 304b of the indian penal code and within the cognizance of this court.or alternativelythat, prior to the 22nd day of october, 1989; at your house at tunikipadu, you subjected yedla krishna kumari, wife of a-1 among you and daughter-in-law of a-2 and a-3 among you, to such cruelty and harassment as did drive the said krishna kumari to commit suicide, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 498a of the indian penal code and within the cognizance of this court."(underlining for emphasis)22. mere omission or defect in framing charge does not disable the criminal court from convicting the accused for the offence which is found to have been proved on the evidence on record. the code of criminal procedure has ample provisions to meet a situation like the one before us. from the statement of charge framed under section 304b and in the alternative section 498a, ipc (as quoted above) it is clear that all facts and ingredients for framing charge for offence under section 306, ipc existed in the case. the mere omission on the part of the trial judge to mention of section 306, ipc with 498a, ipc does not preclude the court from convicting the accused for the said offence when found proved. in the alternate charge framed under section 498a of ipc, it has been clearly mentioned that the accused subjected the deceased to such cruelty and harassment as to drive her to commit suicide. the provisions of section 221 of cr.p.c. take care of such a situation and safeguard the powers of the criminal court to convict an accused for an offence with which he is not charged although on facts found in evidence, he could have been charged for such offence. section 221 of cr.p.c. needs reproduction:-"221. where it is doubtful what offence has been committed. - (1) if a single act or series of acts is of such a nature that it is doubtful which of several offences the facts which can be proved will constitute, the accused may be charged with having committed all or any of such offences, and any number of such charges may be tried at once; or he may be charged in the alternative with having committed some one of the said offences.(2) if in such a case the accused is charged with one offence, and it appears in evidence that he committed a different offence for which he might have been charged under the provisions of sub-section (1), he may be convicted of the offence which he is shown to have committed, although he was not charged with it.23. the provision of sub-section (2) of section 221 read with sub-section (1) of the said section can be taken aid of in convicting and sentencing the accused no. 1 of offence of abetment of suicide under section 306 of ipc along with or instead of section 498a of ipc.24. section 215 allows criminal court to ignore any error in stating either the offence or the particulars required to be stated in the charge, if the accused was not, in fact, misled by such error or omission in framing the charge and it has not occasioned a failure of justice. see section 215 of cr.p.c. which reads:-"215. effect of errors - no error in stating either the offence or the particulars required to be stated in the charge, and no omission to state the offence or those particulars, shall be regarded at any stage of the case as material, unless the accused was in fact misled by such error or omission, and it has occasioned a failure of justice.25. as provided in section 215 of cr.p.c. omission to frame charge under section 306 ipc has not resulted in any failure of justice. we find no necessity to remit the matter to the trial court for framing charge under section 306 ipc and direct a retrial for that charge. the accused cannot legitimately complain of any want of opportunity to defend the charge under section 306, ipc and a consequent failure of justice. the said facts found in evidence, which justify conviction of the appellant under section 498a for cruel treatment of his wife, make out a case against him under section 306 ipc of having abetted commission of suicide by the wife. the appellant was charged for an offence of higher degree causing "dowry death" under section 304b which is punishable with minimum sentence of seven years rigorous imprisonment and maximum for life. presumption under section 113a of the evidence act could also be raised against him on same facts constituting offence of cruelty under section 498a, ipc. no further opportunity of defence is required to be granted to the appellant when he had ample opportunity to me the charge under section 498a, ipc.26. it may be mentioned that against confirmation of his conviction by the high court under section 498a, ipc, the accused no. 1 has not preferred any special leave to appeal to this court. the facts found-proved for his conviction and sentence under section 498a, ipc, cannot now be questioned by the accused. our conclusion, therefore, is that same facts and evidence on which accused no. 1 was charged under section 498a and section 304b, the accused can be convicted and sentenced under section 306 ipc. we find no legal or procedural impediment in doing so.27. the legislature has by amending the penal code and evidence act made penal law more strident for dealing with and punishing offences against married women. such strident laws would have a deterrent effect on the offenders only if they are so stridently implemented by the law courts to achieve the legislative intent. on the facts found and the offence proved to have been committed leading to suicidal death of the wife, imprisonment of two years with fine of rs. 500/- is too light a sentence. for offence under section 306 ipc the sentence may extend to ten years. in this case the husband is found to have harassed his wife to such an extent as to drive her to commit suicide. sentence of five years would, in our opinion, be a proper sentence for the crime with the amount of fine increased to rs. 20,000/- to be paid as compensation to the parents of the deceased. on non-payment of fine the accused no. 1 shall suffer further sentence of one year.28. we, thus, allow criminal appeal no. 1457 of 1995 preferred by the parents of the deceased. we maintain the conviction and sentence of accused no. 1 under section 498a, ipc. the accused no. 1 is also convicted under section 306, ipc and sentenced to five years rigorous imprisonment with a fine of rs. 20,000/- to be paid as compensation to the parents of the deceased. in the event of non-payment of fine, accused no. 1 shall suffer imprisonment for a further period of one year. the sentences imposed under section 498a, ipc and under section 306, ipc shall run concurrently.29. connected criminal appeal nos. 1458-59 of 1995 preferred by the state against acquittal of accused nos. 2 & 3 are dismissed.
r.c. lahoti, j.1. the high court of andhra pradesh at hyderabad has, by its impugned judgment dated april 11, 1990, allowed the writ petition filed by the respondent national thermal power corporation ltd. (hereinafter 'ntpcl', for short) and declared that the levy of duty by the state of andhra pradesh on the sales of electrical energy generated by the corporation-respondent no. 1 at its thermal power station set up at ramagundam, within the state of andhra pradesh, and sold to the electricity boards of karnataka, kerala, tamil nadu and the state of goa in pursuance of contracts of sales occasioning inter-state movement of electricity is incompetent and outside the power of state legislature. consequently, the tax levied and collected has also been held to be without authority of law, hence liable to the refunded in accordance with law. on a prayer made by the learned advocate general on behalf of the state of andhra pradesh, the high court certified that the case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of constitution under article 132. the appeal has been filed pursuant to the certificate so granted by the high court. on 4.10.1991, a bench of two learned judges directed the appeal to be placed for hearing before a constitution bench, as required by clause (3) of article 145 of the constitution.2. at a point of time when this court was seized of the appeal filed by the state of andhra pradesh, ntpcl moved a petition under article 139a of the constitution seeking withdrawal of writ petition no. 1941 of 1996 ntpcl v. state of madhya pradesh and anr. pending in the high court of madhya pradesh at jabalpur to this court. the prayer was allowed vide order dated 13.10.1997 and on receipt of the records from high court of madhya pradesh the same has been registered here as t-c-3/1998.3. the state of madhya pradesh and newly formed state of chhattisgarh with effect from 1.11.2000, during the pendency of the petition were noticed and the parties thereto have been heard analogously with the hearing in c.a. no. 3112/1990. however, for convenience sake we will refer to states of madhya pradesh and chhattisgarh as state of m.p. only as admittedly until the formation of new state the two power stations in question were situated therein only.facts in c.a. no. 3112/19904. andhra pradesh electricity duty act, 1939 provides for levy of duty on certain sales and consumption of electricity by licensees in the state of andhra pradesh. the definition of the term 'licensee' specifically includes the national thermal power corporation (respondent no. 1) or any other corporation engaged in the business of supplying energy. section 3 of the act is the charging section, the relevant part whereof reads as under:-"3. levy of a duty in certain sales of electrical energy. --(1) save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), every licensee in the state of andhra pradesh shall pay every month to the state government in the prescribed manner, a duty calculated at the rate of four paise per unit of energy, on and in respect of all sales of energy, except sales to the government of india for consumption by that government or sales to the government of india or a railway company operating any railway for consumption in the construction, maintenance or operation of that railway effected by the licensee during the previous month at a price of more than twelve paise per unit and on and in respect of all energy which was consumed by the licensee during the previous month for purposes other than those connected with the construction, maintenance and operation of his electrical undertaking and which, if sold to a private consumer under like conditions, would have fetched a price of more than twelve paise per unit. provided that no duty under this sub-section shall be payable on and in respect of sale of energy effected:-(a) by the andhra pradesh state electricity board to any other licensee;(b) by the national thermal power corporation to the andhra pradesh state electricity board."5. a bare reading of the provision shows that duty is leviable at the prescribed rate on 'all sales of energy' effected by the licensee during the previous month at a price of more than 12 paise per unit. duty is also leviable on all energy consumed by the licensee. there are certain categories of sales and consumption saved and excluded from what would otherwise have been dutiable. however, in the present case, we are not concerned with those exclusions nor with levy of duty on consumption. the limited question arising for our consideration is--whether sales of energy by ntpcl, the respondent no. 1, to several electricity boards situated outside the state of andhra pradesh and to the state of goa, attract the incidence of taxation under section 3 of the act.6. according to the facts found by the high court, ntpcl, a government company, wholly owned by the government of india, has set up several super thermal power stations in different parts of the country normally located near coal-pit heads. one such super thermal power station is set up in ramagundam in karimnagar district of the state of andhra pradesh. there are various transmission lines and sub-stations through which the power generated at ramagundam station is transmitted to the purchasers. the power generated is fed into the southern grid and is made available to the several state electricity boards and the state of goa. these facts are not in controversy and sufficient to be taken note of for the purpose of this appeal. during the course of hearing by reference to certain documents, it was sought to be pointed out where the meters are located--within the state of m.p. or within the territories of buyer states or at both the places, by reference to reading whereof the quantum of energy sold, exported or imported is fixed and the price calculated. we do not propose to state the facts and contending submissions in that regard in details as it is unnecessary.7. the controversy centers mainly around the question as to under which entry andhra pradesh electricity duty act, 1939 is covered and whether the sales of electricity by ntpcl, the respondent no. 1, to the electricity boards situated outside the state of andhra pradesh and to the state of goa, can be construed as inter-state or inter-state sale.facts in t-c-3/988. the relevant facts of this writ petition are briefly set out in what follows. the erstwhile central provinces and berar legislative assembly enacted the cp and berar electricity duty act, 1949 which having been adapted in the state of madhya pradesh has come to be known as m.p. electricity duty act, 1949 and extends to the whole of madhya pradesh. the preamble to the act, as amended by madhya pradesh legislature, provides that it is an act for the levy of duty on sale or consumption of electrical energy. the expression "distributor of electrical energy" is defined in clause (b) of section 2 to specifically include therein the national thermal power corporation section 3 provides that every distributor of electrical energy and every producer shall, subject to certain exceptions, pay every month to the state government at duty calculated at the rates specified in the table appended thereto on the units of electrical energy sold or supplied to a consumer or consumed by himself for his own purposes or for purposes of his township or colony during the preceding month. the table appended to section 3 prescribes different rates of duty depending on the purpose for which electrical energy is sold, supplied or consumed, the details whereof are not relevant for our purpose. there is yet another legislation, namely, the madhya pradesh upkar adhiniyam 1981 (no. 1 of 1982) which provides for levy of certain cesses. sub-section (1) of section 3 thereof provides that every distributor of electrical energy shall pay to the state government an energy development cess at the rate of certain paise per unit on the total units of electrical energy sold or supplied to a consumer or consumed by himself or his employees during any month. ntpcl has two power projects located in the state of madhya pradesh (i) korba super thermal power station at pragati nagar, district bilaspur, known as korba station (presently in the state of chhattisgarh) and (ii) vindhyachal super thermal power station situated at vindhya nagar, district sidhi of madhya pradesh known as vindhyachal station. the electricity generated by it at these two stations, is fed into northern grid and supplied to several states outside the state of madhya pradesh pursuant to contracts entered into between the parties, that is, the seller and the buyers. on 30.11.1994, the chief engineer (electricity duty) and chief electrical inspector, government of madhya pradesh issued a letter annexed by a tabulated statement raising a demand of rs. 2,74,01,59,535/28 paise for the period commencing october, 1984 and expiring march, 1996. the demand is on account of electricity duty at the rate of 2 paise per unit and cess at the rate of 1 paise per unit calculated on the units sold to electricity boards of other states.9. in the counter-affidavit on behalf of the states of madhya pradesh and chhattisgarh reliance has been placed on the definition of 'consumer' engrafted into the m.p. electricity duty act, 1949 by m.p. act no. 46 of 1984 with effect from 1.10.1984 which reads as under:-"consumer" means any person who receives electrical energy sold or supplied by a distributor of electrical energy or a producer and includes a person receiving electrical energy in bulk for onward distribution.10. by the same amendment "distributor of electrical energy" was defined so as to include therein ntpcl, as already stated. it is admitted by the state of m.p. and chhattisgarh that the power generated at the two power stations is old and supplied to various electricity boards/electricity departments situated in other states but as the generating stations are located in the state of madhya pradesh the sale is not an inter-state sale. the situs of sale is within the state of m.p. transaction of sale is complete in the state of m.p. and the buyers carry the electricity to their respective states when property in electricity sold has already passed to them. reliance has been placed on the several clauses of the bulk power supply agreement entered into between ntpcl and buyers, one of which entered into between ntpcl and western region electricity board (wreb) having its office at andheri east, bombay, has been filed and quoted in the counter affidavit, according to which (a) metering is within the state of m.p.; (b) transmission loss from madhya pradesh to the home state of the buyer is to the account of the buyer; (c) wheeling loss from madhya pradesh to the home state of the buyer to the account of the buyer; (d) transmission charges for transmission from madhya pradesh to the home state of the buyer to the account of the buyer; (e) wheeling charges from madhya pradesh to the home state of the buyer to the account of the buyer; (f) delivery of wreb in madhya pradesh; (g) ntpcl cases to have control over the electrical energy once it is delivered to wreb within state of m.p.; (h) payment made by the bulk beneficiaries is in respect of quantum of electrical energy supplied/delivered at metering point in state of m.p. similar are the agreements entered into with other outside-state buyers.11. it is not disputed that the power generated at the abovesaid two stations is fed into transmission system of power grid corporation of india limited and the transmission systems of other bulk power beneficiaries wherefrom the buyers draw the power purchased by them. great emphasis was aid on the fact that the points for metering are installed within the state of madhya pradesh. it was submitted that the transaction under scrutiny in the case of state of m.p. is different from the one under scrutiny in the case of state of andhra pradesh.relevant provisions12. we proceed to notice the relevant provisions of the constitution and other statutory provisions.13. changes of far reaching implications were made in the constitution by the constitution (sixth amendment) act, 1956 with effect from september 11, 1956. to enable a convenient comparative reading, we set out the provisions as under:-"246. subject-matter of laws made by parliament and by the legislatures of state. -- (1) notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3), parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list i in the seventh schedule (in this constitution referred to as the "union list").(2) notwithstanding anything in clause (3), parliament and, subject to clause (1), the legislature of any state also, have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list iii in the seventh schedule (in this constitution referred to as the "concurrent list").(3) subject to clauses (1) and (2), the legislature of any state has exclusive power to make laws for such state or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list ii in the seventh schedule (in this constitution referred to as the 'state list').(4) parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of india nor included in a state notwithstanding that such matter is a matter enumerated in the state list."seventh schedulelist i - union listxx xx xx xx 	92a. taxes on the sale of purchase of good other than newspapers, where such sale of purchase takes place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce.(inserted by sixth amendment.)(list ii - state listentry 52taxes on the entry of goods into a local area for consumption, use or sale therein.entry 53taxes on the consumption or sale of electricity.entry 54:(before sixth amendment)54, taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers 	(after sixth amendment)54. taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, subject to the provisions of entry 92a of list ibefore 11.9.56 269.the following duties and taxes shall be levied and collected by the 	after 11.9.56. 269.(1) the following duties and taxes shall be levied and collected by the government ofgovernment of india taxes levied but shall be assigned to and collected by the states in the union but manner provided in assigned to the clause (2), namely:-states. 	india but shall be taxes levied and assigned to the states collected by the in the manner union but provided in clause (2), assigned to the namely:-states.(a) duties in respect of succession to property other than agriculture land; 	(a) duties in respect of succession to property other than agricultural land;(b) estate duty in respect of property other than agricultural land; 	(b) estate duty in respect of property other than agricultural land;(c) terminal taxes on goods or passengers carried by railway, sea or air. 	(c) terminal taxes on goods or passengers carried by railway, sea or air.(d) taxes on railway fares and freights; 	(d) taxes on railway fares and freights;(e) taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock-exchanges and future markets; 	(e) taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock-exchanges and future markets;(f) taxes on sale or purchase of newspaper and on advertisements published therein. 	(f) taxes on sale or purchase of newspaper and on advertisements published therein(g) taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, where such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce.(h) taxes on the consignment of goods (whether the consignment is to the person making it or to any other person), where such consignment takes place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce;(2) the net proceeds in any financial year of any such duty or tax, except in so far as those proceeds represent proceeds attributable to states specified in part c of the first schedule, shall not form part of the consolidated fund of india, but shall be assigned to the states within which that duty or tax is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those states in accordance with such principles of distribution as may be formulated by parliament by law. 	(2) the net proceeds in any financial year of any such duty or tax, except in so far as those proceeds represent proceeds attributable to union territories shall not form part of the consolidated fund of india, but shall be assigned to the states within which that duty or tax is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those states in accordance with such principles of distribution as may be formulated by parliament by law.(3) parliament may be law formulate principles of determining when a sale or purchase of or consignment of goods takes place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce.before 11.9.56. 	after 11.9.56.286. (1) no law of a state shall impose or authorise the imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of goods where such sale or purchase takes place 	286. (1) no law of a state shall impose or authorise the imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of goods where such sale or purchase takes place(a) outside the state; or(b) in the course of the import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of india. 	(a) outside the state; or(b) in the course of the import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of india.explanation - for the purposes of sub-clause (a), a sale or purchase shall be deemed to have been place in the state in which the goods have actually been delivered as a direct result of such sale or purchase for the purpose of consumption in the state, notwithstanding the fact the under the general law relating to sale of good the property in the goods has by reason of such sale or purchase passed in another state. 	*****(2) except in so far as parliament may by law otherwise provide, no law of a state shall impose, or authorise the imposition of a tax on the sale or purchase of any goods where such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce:provided that the president may by order direct that any tax on the sale or purchase of goods which was being lawfully levied by the government of any state immediately before the commencement of this constitution shall, notwithstanding that the imposition of such tax is contrary to the provisions of this clause, continue to be levied until the thirty-first day of march, 1951. 	(2) parliament may by law of formulate principles for determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place in any of the ways mentioned in clause (1).(3) no law made by the legislature of a state imposing, or authorizing the imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of any such goods as have been declared by parliament by law to be essential for the life of the community shall have effect unless it has been reserved for the consideration of the president and has received his assent. 	(3) any law of a state shall, in so far as it imposes, or authorizes the imposition of,-(a) a tax on the sale or purchase of goods declared by parliament by law to be of special importance in inter-state(b) a tax on the sale or purchase of goods, being a tax of the nature referred to in sub-clause (b), sub-clause (c) or sub-clause (d) of clause (29a) of article 366, be subject to such restrictions and conditions in regard to the system of levy, rates and other incidents of the tax as parliament may be law specify.14. out of the several changes introduced by the constitution (sixth amendment) act, only a few are relevant and material for our purpose. in article 269, sub-clause (g) was added in clause (1) and a new clause (3) was added. the forty-sixth amendment substituted the words 'sale or purchase of, or consignment of, goods' in place of 'sale or purchase of goods' as was occurring in clause (3) inserted by sixth amendment. such forty sixth amendment has no relevance for the present controversy. in article 286 subsequent to the sixth amendment, clause (3) has been brought in the present form by forty-sixth amendment which again is not relevant for the present controversy. what is relevant for our purpose is the deleting of former explanation appended to clause (1) and substitution of clause (2) in the present form in article 286 by sixth amendment.15. as to the several relevant entries quoted hereinabove, it may be noted that entry 92a in list-i of seventh schedule was added by sixth amendment. entry 54 in list-ii in the present form was substituted by sixth amendment. entries 52 and 53 in list-ii remain unaffected by sixth amendment.16. the central sales tax act, 1956 was enacted to formulate principles for determining - when a sale or purchase of goods takes place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce or outside a state or in the course of import into or export from india, to provide for the levy, collection and distribution of taxes on sale of goods in the course of inter-state trade or commerce etc., as the preamble to the act states. clause (d) of section 2 defines 'goods' (unless the context otherwise requires) to include all materials, articles, commodities and all other kinds of moveable properties, but not including newspapers, actionable claims, stocks, shares and securities. section 3 of the act, placed in chapter ii thereof, provides as under:-chapter iiformulation of principles fordetermining when a sale orpurchase of goods takes place inthe course of inter-state tradeor commerce or outside a stateor in the course of import orexport3. when is a sale or purchase of goods said to take place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce. - a sale or purchase of goods shall be deemed to take place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce if the sale or purchase--(a) occasions the movement of goods from one state to another; or(b) is effected by a transfer of documents of title to the goods during their movement from one state to another.explanation 1. -- where goods are delivered to a carrier or other bailee for transmission, the movement of the goods shall, for the purpose of clause (b), be deemed to commence at the time of such delivery and terminate at the time when delivery is taken from such carrier or bailee.explanation 2. -- where the movement of goods commences and terminates in the same state it shall not be deemed to be a movement of goods from one state to another by reason merely of the fact that in the course of such movement the goods pass through the territory of any other state.'17. at this juncture it would be appropriate to have a view of the legislative history. explanation to clause (1) of article 286 generated some controversy which led to the constitution of a larger bench (7-judge strength) in the bengal immunity company limited v. the state of bihar and ors. - manu/sc/0083/1955manu/sc/0083/1955 : [1955]2scr603 . the larger bench ruled by majority that an inter-state sale or purchase continues to be so irrespective of the state where the sale can be held to be located under the general law or by the fiction created by the explanation appended to clause (1) of article 286. the situs of a sale or purchase is wholly irrelevant so far as its inter-state character is concerned. the larger bench further ruled that until parliament by law made in exercise of the powers vested in it by clause (2) of article 286 provides otherwise, no state can impose or authorize the imposition of any tax on sale or purchase of goods when any sales or purchases take place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce. to put in other words, it was held that explanation to article 286(1) as it existed prior to the sixth amendment could not be applied for the purpose of interpreting clause (2) of article 286.18. the issue attracted the attention of taxation enquiry commission 1953-54 (tec, for short). in its report, volume iii. chapter 4, vide para 30, the commission observed, inter alia, that clause (1) of article 286 links the sales-tax to one of the two parties, viz., the consumer and lays down that no state shall levy tax on a sale which results in delivery for consumption in another state. while making recommendations for consideration of future policy regarding sales tax, it opined that the system should contain provisions whereby certain constitutional restrictions on the state and certain powers of levy and control by the union are introduced. the tec observed that the constitution, in effect, divides sales of goods in india into (a) goods delivered for consumption in particular states and (b) other sales, which dichotomy is imperfect from the point of view of tax administration. it suggested division, both useful and effective, of all sales of goods into two, namely (a) those in the course of inter-state trade and commerce, and (b) those not in the course of such trade and commerce; while the former should be the sphere of the union and the latter in the sphere of the states. it appears that so far as the electricity duty is concerned, though the subject was separately dealt with by the report, in the then circumstances the tec did not comprehend inter-state sale of electricity and, therefore, did not make any recommendation specifically in that regard. however, that does not make any difference.19. pursuant to the recommendations made by the taxation enquiry commission the parliament incorporated certain amendments in the constitution by enacting the constitution (sixth amendment) act, 1956 which we have already noticed briefly.20. we have very briefly stated the legislative history for it has been noticed in details in a recent constitution bench decision of this court in 20th century finance corporation ltd. and anr. v. state of maharashtra - manu/sc/0412/2000manu/sc/0412/2000 : air2000sc2436 and earlier in shiv dutt rai fateh chand etc. v. union of india and anr. manu/sc/0315/1983manu/sc/0315/1983 : [1984]148itr664(sc) , and therefore, we have deemed it not necessary to repeat or re-state the same in details. the central sales tax act, 1956 was enacted by the parliament as authorized by the constitution. we have already reproduced section 3 of the cst act hereinabove. by section 6 of the act the central government was empowered to levy tax on all sales of goods effected by a dealer in the course of inter-state trade or commerce. however, by the central sales tax (amendment) act, 1972, which came into force with effect from 1.4.1973, the language of section 6 was suitably amended so as to confine the levy of tax under section 6 on all sales "of goods other than electrical energy". the statement of objects and reasons for this amendment was so stated "exemption from central sales-tax act on inter-state sales of electrical energy is now dependent on the exemption form tax by a state government on local sales of electrical energy. it is now proposed to provide specifically that inter-state sale of electrical energy would not be liable to central sale tax." (see gazette of india extraordinary part ii, at page 522). the purpose behind referring to this amendment and the sor is that in the understanding of the parliament also the inter-state sale of electrical energy was liable to central sales-tax under section 6 of the act and but for the amendment such tax was capable of being levied by the central government.electricity, what it is21. before we deal with the constitutional aspects let us first state what electricity is, as understood in law, and what are its relevant characteristics. it is settled with the pronouncement of this court in commissioner of sales tax, madhya pradesh, indore v. madhya pradesh electricity board, jabalpur - manu/sc/0156/1968manu/sc/0156/1968 : [1969]2scr939 that electricity is goods. the definition of goods as given in article 366(12) of the constitution was considered by this court and it was held that the definition in terms is very wide according to which "goods" means all kinds of moveable property. the term "moveable property" when considered with reference to "goods" as defined for the purpose of sales-tax cannot be taken in a narrow sense and merely. because electrical energy is not tangible or cannot be moved or touched like, for instance, a price of wood or a book it cannot cease to be moveable property when it has all the attributes of such property. it is capable of abstraction, consumption and use which if done dishonestly is punishable under section 39 of the indian electricity act. 1910. if there can be sale and purchase of electrical energy like any other moveable object, this court held that there was no difficulty in holding that electric energy was intended to be covered by the definition of "goods". however, a.n. grover, j. speaking for three-judge bench of this court went on to observed that electric energy "can be transmitted, transferred, delivered, stored, possessed etc. in the same way as any other moveable property". in this observation we agree with grover, j. on all other characteristics of electric energy except that it can be 'stored' and to the extent that electric energy can be 'stored', the observation must be held to be erroneous or by oversight. the science and technology till this day have not been able to evolve any methodology by which electric energy can be preserved or stored.22. another significant characteristic of electric energy is that its generation or production coincides almost instantaneously with its consumption. to quote from aiyar's law lexicon (second edition, 2000) -- 'electricity in physics is "the name given to the cause of a series of phenomena exhibited by various substances, and also to the phenomena themselves." its true nature is not understood. imperial dict. (quoted in spensley v. lancashire ins. co., 54 wis. 433, 442, 11 nw 894, where the court, quoting from the same authority, said, "we are totally ignorant of the nature of this cause whether it be a material agent or merely a property of matter. but as some hypothesis is necessary for explaining the phenomena observed, it has been assumed to be a highly subtle, imponderable fluid, identical with lightning, which pervades the pores of all bodies, and is capable of motion from one body to another.' this characteristic quality of electric energy was judicially noticed in indian aluminium co. etc.etc. v. state of kerala and ors. -- manu/sc/0370/1996manu/sc/0370/1996 : [1996]2scr23 . vide para 25 this court has noted. "continuity of supply and consumption starts from the moment the electrical energy passes through the meters and sale simultaneously takes place as soon as meter reading is recorded. all the three steps or phases (i.e. sale, supply and consumption) take place without any hiatus. it is true that from the place of generating electricity, the electricity is supplied to the sub-station installed at the units of the consumers through electrical higher-tension transformers and from there electricity is supplied to the meter. but the moment electricity is supplied through the meter, consumption and sale simultaneously take place." ..... "as soon as the electrical energy is supplied to the consumers and is transmitted through the meter, consumption takes place simultaneously with the supply. there is no hiatus in its operation. simultaneously sale also takes place." these properties of electricity as goods are of immense relevance as we would state hereafter.list ii, entries 53 and 54, how to be read:23. we now come to the question on the interpretation of entry 53 in list ii of seventh schedule. it provides for taxes on the consumption or sale of electricity. the word 'sale' as occurring in entry 52 came up for the consideration of this court in burmah shell oil storage & distributing co. india ltd. v. the belgaum borough municipality manu/sc/0314/1962manu/sc/0314/1962: air1963sc906 . it was held that the act of sale is merely the means for putting the goods in the way of use or consumption. it is an earlier stage, the ultimate destination of the goods being "use or consumption". we feel that the same meaning should be assigned to the word 'sale' in entry 53. this is for a fortiorari reason in the context of electricity as there can be no sale of electricity excepting by its consumption, for it can neither be preserved nor stored. it is this property of electricity which persuaded this court in indian aluminium co. etc's caseh (supra) to hold that in the context of electricity, the word 'supply' should be interpreted to include sale or consumption of electricity. entry 53 should therefore be read as 'taxes on the consumption or sale for consumption of electricity'.24. with these two things in mind, that electricity is goods, and that sale of electricity has to be construed and read as sale for consumption within the meaning of entry 53, the conflict, if any, between entry 53 and entry 54 ceases to exist and the two can be harmonized and read together. because electricity is goods it is covered in entry 54 also. it is not disputed that duty on electricity is tax. tax on the sale or purchase of goods including electricity but excluding newspapers shall fall within entry 54 and shall be subject to provisions of entry 92a of list i. taxes on the consumption or sale for consumption of electricity within the meaning of entry 53 must be consumption within the state and not beyond the territory of the state. any other sale of electricity shall continue to be subject to the limits provided by entry 54. even purchase of electricity would be available for taxation which it would not be if electricity was not includible in the meaning of term 'goods'. a piece of legislation need not necessarily fall within the scope of one entry alone; more than one entry may overlap to cover the subject-matter of a single piece of legislation. a bare consumption of electric energy even by one who generates the same may be liable to be taxed by reference to entry 53 and if the state legislature may choose to impose tax on consumption of electricity by the one who generates it, such tax would not be deemed to be a tax necessarily on manufacture or production or a duty of exercise as held by constitution bench in jiyajeerao cotton mills ltd, birlanagar, gwalior v. state of madhya pradesh - manu/sc/0266/1961manu/sc/0266/1961 : air1963sc414 . a mere consumption of goods (other than electricity), not accompanied by purchase or sale would not be taxable under entry 54 because it does not provide for taxes on the consumption and entry 53 does not speak of goods other than electricity. thus in substance entries 53 and 54 can be and must be read together and to the extent of sale of electricity for consumption outside the state, the electricity being goods, shall also be subject to provisions of entry 92a of list i. this, in our opinion, is the best way of reading the two entries. in c.p. motor spirit act re., air 1939 fc 131 it was hold that two entries in the lists may overlap and sometimes may also appear to be in direct conflict with each other. it is then the duty of this court to reconcile the entries and bring about harmony between them. the court should strive at searching for reasonable and practical construction to seek reconciliation and give effect to all of them. if reconciliation proves impossible the overriding power of union legislature operates and prevails. gwyer, c.j. observed - "a grant of the power in general terms, standing by itself, would no doubt be construed in the wider sense; but it may be qualified by other express provisions in the same enactment by the implication of the context, and even by considerations arising out of what appears to be the general scheme of the act." and again he said, ".....an endeavour must be made to solve it, as the judicial committee have said, by having recourse to the context and scheme of the act, and a reconciliation attempted between two apparently conflicting jurisdictions by reading the two entries together and by interpreting, and, where necessary, modifying the language of the one by that of the other. if needed such a reconciliation should prove impossible, then and only then, will the non-obstante clause operate and the federal power prevail." in calcutta gas co. ltd. v. the state of west bengal and ors. manu/sc/0063/1962manu/sc/0063/1962 : air1962sc1044 , the constitution bench has held that the same rules of construction apply for the purpose of harmonizing an apparent conflict between two entries in the same list.what is inter - state sale?25. it is well settled by a catena of decisions of this court that a sale in the course of inter-state trade has three essential ingredients: (i) there must be a contract of sale, incorporating a stipulation, express or implied, regarding inter-state movement of goods; (ii) the goods must actually move from one state to another pursuant to such contract of sale; the sale being, the proximate cause of movement; and (iii) such movement of goods must be from one state to another state where the sale concludes. it follows as a necessary corollary of these principles that a movement of goods, which takes place independently of a contract of sale would not fall within the meaning of inter-state sale. in other words. if there is no contract of sale preceding the movements of goods, obviously the movement cannot be attributed to the contract of sale. similarly, if the transaction of sale stands completed within the state and the movement of goods takes place thereafter, it would obviously be independently of the contract of sale and necessarily by or on behalf of the purchaser alone and, therefore, the transaction would not be having an inter-state element. precedents are legion; we may briefly refer to some of them. in english electric company of india ltd. v. deputy commercial tax officer manu/sc/0393/1976manu/sc/0393/1976 : [1977]1scr631, this court held that when the movement of the goods from one state to another is an incident of the contract it is a sale in the course of inter-state sale and it does not matter which is the state in which the property passes. what is decisive is whether the sale is one which occasions the movement of goods from one state to another. in union of india v. k.g. khosla and co. ltd., manu/sc/0434/1979manu/sc/0434/1979 : [1979]2scr453 , it was observed that a sale would be an inter-state sale even if the contract of sale does not itself provide for the movement of goods from one state to another provided, however, that such movements was the result of a covenant in the contract of sale or was an incident of the contract. similar view was expressed in m/s. sahney steel and press works ltd. and anr. v. commercial tax officer and others manu/sc/0323/1985manu/sc/0323/1985 : air1985sc1754 . in manganese ore (india) ltd. v. the regional assistant commissioner of sales-tax, jabalpur manu/sc/0439/1975manu/sc/0439/1975 : [1976]3scr99 , after referring to balabhagas hulaschand v. state of orissa, manu/sc/0441/1975manu/sc/0441/1975 : [1976]2scr939 , it was observed that so far as section 3(a) of the c.s.t. act is concerned there is no distinction between unascertained or future goods which are already in existence, if at time when the sale takes place these goods have come into actual existence.effect of entry-53, list-ii, having remained unamended26. having seen the properties of electricity as goods and what is inter-state sale, let us examine the effect of entry 53, list ii, having been left unamended by sixth amendment from another angle. sixth amendment did not touch entry 53 in list-ii and so the contents of entry 53 were not expressly made subject to the provisions of entry 92 a of list i and arguments were advanced with emphasis, on behalf of the states of andhra pradesh and madhya pradesh contending that such omission was deliberate and therefore the restriction which has been placed only in entry 54 by making it subject to the provisions of entry 92a of list i should not be read in entry 53. it was submitted that so far as sale of electricity is concerned even if such sale takes place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce the state can legislate to tax such sale if the sale can be held to have taken place within the territory of that state or if adequate territorial nexus is established between the transaction and state legislation. for the several reasons stated hereinafter such a plea cannot be countenanced.27. the prohibition which is imposed by article 286(1) of the constitution is independent of the legislative entries in seventh schedule. after the decision of larger bench in bengal immunity company limited (supra) and constitution bench decision in ram narian sons ltd. and ors. v. asst. commissioner of sales tax and ors. manu/sc/0084/1955manu/sc/0084/1955 : [1955]2scr483 , there is no manner of doubt that the bans imposed by articles 286 and 269 on the taxation powers of the state are independent and separate and must be got over before a state legislature can impose tax on transaction s of sale or purchase of goods. needless to say, such ban would operate by its own force and irrespective of the language in which in entry in list-ii of seventh schedule has been couched. the dimension given to field of legislation by the language of an entry in list-ii seventh schedule shall always remain subject to the limits of constitutional empowerment to legislate and can never afford to spill over the barriers created by the constitution. the power of state legislature to enact law to levy tax by reference to list ii of the seventh schedule has two limitations : one, arising out of the entry itself; and the other, flowing from the restriction embodied in the constitution. it was held in tata iron and steel co. ltd. bombay v. s.r. sarkar and ors. manu/sc/0270/1960manu/sc/0270/1960 : [1961]1scr379 that field of taxation on sale or purchase taking place in the course of inter-state trade or commerce has been excluded from the competence of the state legislature. in 20th century finance corporation limited (supra) the constitution bench (majority) made it clear that the situs of the sale or purchase is wholly immaterial as regards the inter-state trade or commerce. in view of section 3 of the central sales tax, 1956 all that has to be seen is whether the sale or purchase (a) occasions the movement of goods from one state to another; or (b) is effected by a transfer of documents of title to the goods daring their movement from one state to another. if the transaction of sale satisfies any one of the two requirements it shall be deemed to be a sale or purchase of good sin the course of inter-state trade or commerce and by virtue of articles 269 and 286 of the constitution the same shall be beyond the legislative competence of a state to tax without regard to the fact whether such a prohibitions spelled out by the description of a legislative entry in seventh schedule or not.28. it is well settled, and hardly needs any authority to support the proposition, that several entries in the three lists of seventh schedule are legislative heads or fields of legislation and not the source of legislative empowerment. [to wit, see the calcutta gas co. ltd. v. the state of west bengal and ors. (supra)]. competence to legislate has to be traced to the constitution. the division of powers between parliament and the state legislatures to legislate by reference to territorial limits is defined by article 245. the subject-matters with respect to which those powers can be exercised are enumerated in the several entries divided into three groups as three lists of seventh schedule. residuary powers of legislation are also vested by article 248 in the parliament with respect to any matter not enumerated in any of the lists in seventh schedule. this residuary power finds reflected in entry 97 of list i. if an entry does not spell out an exclusion from field of legislation discernible on its apparent reading, the absence of exclusion cannot be read as enabling power to legislate in the field not specifically excluded, more so, when there is available a specific provision in the constitution prohibiting such legislation.29. it is by reference to the ambit or limits of territory by which the legislative powers vested in parliament and the state legislatures are divided in article 245. generally speaking, a legislation having extra territorial operation can be enacted only by parliament and not by any state legislature; possibly the only exception being one where extra territorial operation of a state legislation is sustainable on the ground of territorial nexus. such territorial nexus, when pleaded, must be sufficient and real and not illusory. in burmah shell oil storage & distributing co. india ltd. (supra), which we have noticed, it was held that sale for use or consumption would mean the goods being brought inside the area for sale to an ultimate consumer, i.e. the one who consumes. in entry 53, 'sale for consumption' (the meaning which we have placed on the word 'sale') would mean a sale for consumption within the state so as to bring a state legislation within the field of entry 53. if sale and consumption were to take place in different states, territorial nexus for the state, where the sale takes place, would be lost. we have already noticed that in case of electricity the events of sale and consumption are inseparable. any state legislation levying duty on sale of electricity, by artificially or fictionally assuming that the events of sale and consumption have taken place in two states, would be vitiated because of extra territorial operation of state legislation.30. in 20th century finance corporation's case, the constitution bench by reference to the definition of "tax on the sale or purchase of goods" (which too has been inserted as clause (29-a) in article 366 by sixth amendment) opined that the situs of sale can be fixed either by the appropriate legislature or by judge made law and no settled principles for determining situs of sale can be laid down. further, the state legislature cannot by law, treat sales outside the state and sales in the course of import as "sales within the state" by fixing the situs of sales within its state in the definition of sale, as it is within the exclusive domain of the appropriate legislature, i.e. parliament to fix the location of sale by creating legal fiction or otherwise. the, majority has clearly opined that the state where the goods are delivered in the transaction of inter-state sale, cannot levy a tax on the basis that one of the events in the chain has taken place within the state; so also where the goods are in existence and available for the transfer of right to use, there also that state cannot exercise power to tax merely because the goods are located in that state. then it was observed that in case where goods are not in existence or where there is an oral or implied transfer of the right to use the goods, such transactions may be effected by the delivery of the goods in which case the taxable event would be on the delivery of goods. however, we are dealing with the case of electricity as goods, the property whereof, as we have already noted, is that the production (generation), transmission, delivery and consumption are simultaneous, almost instantaneous. electricity as goods comes into existence and is consumed simultaneously; the event of sale in the sense of transferring property in the goods merely intervenes as a step between generation and consumption. in such a case when the generation takes place in one state wherefrom it is supplied and it is received in another state where it is consumed, the entire transaction is one and can be nothing else excepting an inter-state sale on account of instantaneous movement of goods from one state to another occasioned by the sale or purchase of goods, squarely covered by section 3 of c.s.t. act.sale of electricity by ntpcl31. in both the cases before us, contracts have been entered into between parties to the transaction, that is, the sellers and the buyers (in other states) prior to the generation of electricity. the ntpcl generates electricity and pursuant to these contracts supplies the same from its power stations situated in the states of a.p. or m.p. to the buyers in other states where it is received and consumed. there is no hiatus between generation, sale, supply, transmission, delivery and consumption. the inter-state movement of electricity is pursuant to contracts of sale. such sales can be held only as inter-state sales.32. though it may be permissible to fix the situs of sale wither by appropriate state legislation or by judge made law as held by the majority opinion in 20th century finance corporation case, we would like to clarify that none of the two can artificially appoint a situs of sale so as to create territorial nexus attracting applicability of tax legislation enacted by any state legislature and tax an inter-state sale in breach of section 3 of the cst act read with articles 286(2) and 269(1) and (3) of the constitution. no state legislation, nor any stipulation in any contract, can fix the situs of sale within the state or artificially define the completion of sale in such a way as to convert an inter-state sale into an intra-state sale or create a territorial nexus to tax an inter-state sale unless permitted by an appropriate central legislation. but this is exactly what the definition of 'consumer' in clause (2)(a) of the m.p. electricity duty act, 1949 has done. the definition of consumer has been artificially extended to include any person who receives electrical energy (without regard to its consumption) and also to include a person who, receiving the electrical energy in bulk, forwards it onwards for distribution, (without regard to the fact whether it transmitted outside the state and whether the electricity is or is not consumed within the state). the same definition has been adopted in m.p. upkar adhiniyam, 1981. this definition of consumer shall have to be read down as including within it only such persons who receive the electricity for consumption or distribution for consumption within the state. without such reading down, the definition of 'consumer' would be rendered ultra vires of articles 286 and 269 of the constitution read with section 3 of the central sales tax act, 1956.consequences on free flow of trade33. yet another reason why we cannot accept the line of reasoning advanced on behalf of the state of andhra pradesh and madhya pradesh is that the same runs counter to the scheme of constitutional provisions and specially the sixth amendment. as has been found by the division bench of andhra pradesh high court in its impugned judgment, if the reasoning suggested on behalf of the state of a.p. was accepted, the state where the dealer supplying the electricity is located and the electricity originates for sale, as also the states in which the purchaser of electricity is located and it is delivered, shall both subject the electrical energy to taxation, by relying on the theory of territorial nexus. such a situation would be the one which was obtaining in the country with respect to sales tax prior to coming into force of the constitution and which led to complications and difficulties in administration of sales tax legislation and therefore, was taken care of by the sixth amendment. such multiple taxation would result in hampering free movement of electricity between the states, and therefore, would be prejudicial to freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of india, and for the unity and integrity of the country. that would give rise to the same situation which was sought to be remedied by the constitution and the sixth amendment.34. on behalf of the states of a.p. and m.p., it was submitted that subject of electricity has been specifically dealt with by articles 287 and 288 of the constitution and by implication the articles, other than 287 and 288, should be read as not dealing with electricity. this submission is stated only to be rejected. these articles make some provisions for electricity and water or electricity in the special context dealt with by those articles and do not exclude applicability of other articles where electricity has been dealt with as goods.35. for the foregoing reasons, we are of the opinion that no fault can be found with the judgment of the andhra pradesh high court which is affirmed and civil appeal no. 3112 of 1990 is dismissed with costs. civil writ petition t.c. no. 3 of 1998 is allowed with costs and the demand raised by the chief electrical (electricity duty) and chief electrical inspector, government of m.p. vide its letter dated 30.11.1995 is directed to be quashed.
1. we have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length and perused the record. it is common ground that the petitioner was, at the relevant point of time, at sl. no. 45 in his group. it is also common ground that no one junior to the petitioner has been promoted to the next higher rank of junior warrant officer. the petitioner, therefore, has no reason to complain against his failure to pick-up the next rank. counsel for the petitioner, however, argued that in terms of averments made in para 'b' of the counter affidavit filed by the respondent-union of india, the timeframe for the promotion to the rank of junior warrant officer within group-i ranges between 12 to 34 years of service, which implies that there is considerable stagnation in the service, denying to those in the petitioner's group a fair opportunity to get promoted to the next higher rank. on behalf of respondent-union of india it was, per contra, argued by mr. ranjit kumar, learned solicitor general, that the promotion policy applicable to the petitioner and similarly situate personnel serving in the air force has been modified and reformed over a period of time so as to leave no room for dissatisfaction or disenchantment among the personnel serving in several groups some of which may be fast moving. mr. kumar argued that the government have taken into consideration all relevant circumstances while directing modifications/reforms in the policy governing promotion of the air force personnel. the modified policy, according to mr. kumar, makes it fair and reasonable and provides equal opportunity to all those serving in different groups in the matter of promotion. we see no reason to brush aside that submission of the learned solicitor general, especially when the petitioner was since retired from service and no one junior to him has stolen to march over him while he was still in service. all that we need say is that the government would do well to undertake a further review to bring such reforms as may, otherwise, be considered reasonable to prevent any heart burning among persons serving in different trades and falling in different groups on account of some of those included in such groups getting promoted earlier than others purely on fortuitous circumstances. with these observations the special leave petition is dismissed. no costs.
1. delay condoned. it appears that the high court has omitted to take note of the explanation under section 246 of the income-tax act, 1961. therefore, we are of the view that the petitioner should be granted liberty to approach the high court by way of a review petition.2. we permit the petitioner to file a review petition before the high court within one month from today, in which case, the high court shall consider the matter on the merits.3. in view of the above, the special leave petition is disposed of. pending interlocutory applications, if any, are disposed of.
s/orders passed by the high courts in writ petitions filed as pilcase note:civil - validity of interim order - direction restraining tourism activity - present petition filed against interim order passed by high court declining to issue any interim directions restraining tourism activities within core and critical areas of tiger reserves in state - whether interim order was sustainablefacts:present petition was directed against an interim order passed by the high court declining to issue any interim directions restraining tourism activities within the core and critical areas of tiger reserves in the state.held:(i) when the matter came up before present court, earlier, present court noted the comprehensive guidelines for tiger conservation and tourism and while modifying interim order directed that henceforth tourism activities would be strictly in accordance with the said guidelines. present court also directed the authorities concerned to ensure that the requirements in the aforesaid guidelines are complied with before tourism activities are recommenced. [2](ii) in the circumstances therefore and keeping in view the subsequent developments, which sufficiently protect the core and critical areas of tiger reserves in terms of the guidelines issued on the subject, there was no reason to keep these proceedings pending with present court any further. [3](iii) no reason why the petitioner should not have the liberty to approach the high court for restoration of the petition especially when present court have not examined any other aspect of the matter in the proceedings before us inasmuch as the challenge before present was only to the refusal of an interim order by the high court. [4](iv) petitioner shall be free to have petition, filed by it, restored before the high court for any further direction that he may seek. [5]orderslp(c) no. 21339 of 20111. this special leave petition is directed against an interim order dated 19th january, 2011 passed by the high court of madhya pradesh at jabalpur in writ petition no. 12351 of 2010 filed in public interest. the high court has, upon a prima facie consideration of the matter, declined to issue any interim directions restraining tourism activities within the core and critical areas of tiger reserves in the state of madhya pradesh. several directions have been issued by this court from time to time pursuant whereto the national tiger conservation authority has by a notification dated 15th october, 2012 notified comprehensive guidelines for tiger conservation and tourism. part b of the said guidelines titled "guidelines for tourism in and around tiger reserves" sets out the broad parameters within which such tourism activities have been permitted.2. when the matter came up before this court on 16th october, 2012, this court noted the guidelines, aforementioned, and while modifying interim order dated 24th july, 2012 directed that henceforth tourism activities will be strictly in accordance with the said guidelines. this court also directed the authorities concerned to ensure that the requirements in the aforesaid guidelines are complied with before tourism activities are recommenced. it was clarified that the validity of notification dated 15th october, 2012 had not been examined and that any party feeling aggrieved of the said notification would be free to challenge the same before an appropriate forum.3. in the circumstances therefore and keeping in view the above subsequent developments, which sufficiently protect the core and critical areas of tiger reserves in terms of the guidelines issued on the subject, we see no reason to keep these proceedings pending with us any further.4. learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submitted that although the impugned order was only an interim order, the high court has disposed off the main writ petition on 7th november, 2012 on the ground that this court was now seized of the matter. she submits that some progress has no doubt been made in the direction of protecting the tiger population in the country on account of the interim orders passed by this court yet much more remains to be done for which purpose the writ petition could be restored before the high court for being taken to its logical conclusion on its merit. we see no reason why the petitioner should not have the liberty to approach the high court for restoration of the writ petition especially when we have not examined any other aspect of the matter in the proceedings before us inasmuch as the challenge before us was only to the refusal of an interim order by the high court.5. in the circumstances, we dispose off the special leave petition with the observations that the petitioner shall be free to have writ petition no. 12351 of 2010, filed by it, restored before the high court for any further direction that he may seek. we make it clear that we have expressed no opinion on the merits of anyone of the contentions that may be open to the parties in the said writ petition including those relating to the validity of the notification already issued for any matter relevant or incidental thereto. this order shall also dispose off writ petitions (civil) no. 387 of 2012 and 438 of 2012 and all applications filed therein, reserving liberty for the parties in those cases to seek redress in appropriate proceedings, if so advised before the high court. no costs.
1. the concurrent finding of fact recorded in the impugned judgment on the charge for the offence punishable under section 7 read with sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) and 13(2) of the prevention of corruption act, 1988 is under challenge before this court, urging various grounds. mr. nikhil goel, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has invited our attention to the evidence of p.w.-1 and p.w.-2 and defence witnesses d.w.-4 and d.w.-5 to show that the concurrent finding of fact is erroneous for want of evidence with regard to the demand of illegal gratification made by the appellant with p.w.-1/complainant for furnishing past revenue records (45 years old) to produce the same in the civil court at the illegal gratification of rs. 450/-. the high court on reappreciation of the evidence on record examined the correctness of the finding of guilt on the charge and very carefully examined the prosecution evidence and concurred with the finding of fact recorded by the trial court on the charge framed against the appellant. the correctness of the same is questioned in this appeal placing strong reliance upon the evidence elicited in the cross-examination of p.w.-1 and p.w.-2, the complainant and the panch witness respectively.2. by a careful reading of the relevant portion of both the witnesses, it does not appeal to us that there is any error committed by the high court in concurring with the finding of fact recorded by the trial court on the conviction on the charge. further, the grievance of the appellant is that the defence evidence has not been considered at all at the time of appreciating the evidence both by the trial court and the appellate court, though it is required to be considered at the time of recording of finding on the charge.3. we have threadbare examined the aforesaid contentions. we are of the considered view that the appellate court has consciously applied its mind and reappreciated the evidence and held that the finding of fact recorded by the trial court on the charge is found to be legal and valid.4. the submission made by mr. nikhil goel, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, that the finding is erroneous for want of evidence with regard to the demand of illegal gratification from the complainant/p.w.-1 which is sine qua non for convicting the accused under sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) read with section 13(2) of the prevention of corruption act, 1988. by a careful reading of evidence of d.w. 4 and d.w. 5, it does not support the case of the defence, therefore, the submission made in this regard to annul the concurrent finding of fact on the charge is not possible for this court in these proceedings in exercise of its appellate power under article 136 of the constitution of india. therefore, we are not inclined to interfere with the finding of guilt on the charge framed against the appellant.5. lastly, it is contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that having regard to the incident which is of 22 years old, the sentence imposed for the charge for two years is on the higher side. this contention of the learned counsel is appealable to us. having regard to the fact that the occurrence is of 22 years old, keeping this important aspect in mind, we deem it appropriate to reduce the sentence from two years to one year. we order accordingly.6. it is stated by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant that the appellant has already undergone four months sentence. the appellant, who was released on bail pursuant to this court's order dated 17.10.2011, shall serve out the remaining period of sentence, as modified in this order. his bail bonds stand cancelled and he be taken into custody forthwith.7. the impugned order as far as the sentence is concerned stands modified accordingly. with the aforesaid modification in the period of sentence only, this appeal is partly allowed.
1. leave granted.2. we have heard the counsel for the parties finally, with their consent, as the matter was fixed for final arguments by this court.3. the issue that is involved in the present appeal does not require stating of the facts in detail. we would, however, recapitulate those facts which are absolutely essential for deciding this matter.4. wife of respondent no. 1 was under the medical treatment of dr. b. halder, dr. abani roychowdhury and dr. sukumar mukherjee (hereinafter referred to as delinquent doctors). she, however, could not survive. her husband-respondent no. 1 was not satisfied with the manner in which medical treatment was given by the aforesaid doctors, as according to him, their negligence in performance of their duties as doctors led to the death of his wife. he, therefore, lodged a written complaint with the west bengal medical council against those three doctors in the year 1999 alleging negligence and maltreatment of his wife by the said three medical practitioners. on receiving the complaint, the medical council referred the same to the penal and ethical cases committee no. 1 (hereinafter referred to as 'inquiry committee') with instructions to conduct an inquiry into the allegations made in the said complaint. this committee comprised five doctors (other appellants were the members of the west bengal medical council).5. it appears that this inquiry committee took opinion of certain experts in their field and the opinion of the said experts was in favour of the complainant. notwithstanding the same, the inquiry committee submitted its report giving findings that the delinquent doctors were not at fault. on the basis of that report, they were exonerated by the west bengal medical council. however, it may be mentioned that the complainant had also initiated proceedings against the delinquent doctors before the national consumer disputes redressal commission (ncdrc) alleging deficiency in service against several medical practitioners including the said three delinquent doctors. though ncdrc rejected the complaint, in the appeal filed against the orders of the ncdrc, this court held the said delinquent doctors guilty of negligence but at the same time, it was found that their negligence was not of criminal nature but of civil consequence and, therefore, awarded damages in favour of the complainant and against the delinquent doctors. this judgment is reported as 'molay kumar ganguly v. sukumar mukherjee' [manu/sc/1416/2009manu/sc/1416/2009 : 2009 (9) scc 221].6. it is clear from the above that insofar as the three delinquent doctors were concerned, it has been finally held that they acted with negligence while according medical treatment to the wife of the complainant.7. the complainant, after the aforesaid judgment of this court, filed criminal complaint against the members of the inquiry committee of west bengal medical council including the appellants herein alleging that they have committed offence under section 201 read with section 120b of the indian penal code (indian penal code). the complaint is founded on the allegations that even when there were four reports of four different medical experts to the effect that delinquent doctors were guilty of professional misconduct as they had acted with negligence while giving medical treatment to the wife of the complainant, these accused persons entered into conspiracy to save the delinquent doctors. on this basis, culpability which is attributed to these appellants can be traced in paragraph 23 of the complaint which reads as under:23. that on the backdrop of what has been canvassed in the foregoing paragraphs, it is most palpable and glaring that the accused persons had entered into a deep-rooted criminal conspiracy amongst themselves to screen the offenders and in pursuance to that, as overt acts, the accused persons knowing fully well that the offending doctors had committed the offence of medical negligence and thereby caused death of the wife of the petitioner, deliberately concealed and withheld the evidences and/or information relating to the said offenders with the intention to save their skin and thereby committed the offence punishable under section 201 of the indian penal code read with section 120b of the said code.8. the concerned magistrate took cognizance of the said complaint and issued process. on receipt of the notice, the appellants challenged the proceedings arising out of the said complaint by filing petition under section 482 of the code of criminal procedure (cr.p.c.) in the high court of calcutta being c.r.r. no. 4243 of 2011 submitting that no case of conspiracy was made out in the complaint and the 'complaint was malicious and untenable' and it could not be said that any offence by the appellants was committed under section 201 read with section 120b of the indian penal code. the high court, after hearing the parties, dismissed the said petition vide impugned judgment dated 01.07.2013 and it is this judgment which is impugned in the present proceedings.9. a perusal of the judgment of the high court would disclose that the high court has discussed the matter in detail as to whether prior sanction of the medical council was required in view of the provisions of section 197 of the code of criminal procedure, inasmuch as one of the submissions of the appellants was that no such complaint could be filed without such a permission in view of the provisions of section 27 of the bengal medical act, 1914, which bars suit or other legal proceedings in respect of any act done in exercise of any power conferred by the said act on the state government or the council or any committee of the council or the registrar. we are not adverting to that discussion as we would be dealing with the matter on merits.10. insofar as the contention of the appellants herein on the maintainability of the case filed by the complainant is concerned, it was argued that even after reading the petition as a whole, it would be seen that it does not disclose commission of any offence much less offence under section 201 indian penal code or section 120b indian penal code. the high court has noted this contention as well as judgments which were applied by the appellants in support of this contention. however, when dealing with these contentions on merit, the high court has dismissed the petition simply on the ground that the jurisdiction of the high court under section 482 code of criminal procedure. to quash a proceeding is required to be sparingly used. after elaborately quoting from judgments in support of the aforesaid principle, the high court has applied the same to the facts of this case in the following manner:17. in the instant case, the complaint of dr. saha relates to nondisclosure or non-consideration of the four expert reports. this, he alleges, is deliberate suppression to screen the offenders, and causing disappearance of evidence of offence. by the term offender, he implies the doctors against whom he brought the actions before the council, court of the chief judicial magistrate, alipore and the ncdrc. as regards the case brought by dr. saha in the court of the chief judicial magistrate, alipore, there has been final acquittal of the accused doctors in the hon'ble supreme court. thus, suppression of such reports could not constitute disappearance of evidence respecting a penal offence or screening the offender, even if the allegations of deliberate suppression are assumed to be correct. nor can such suppression sustain the charge of screening an offender, the hon'ble supreme court having acquitted the accused doctors.11. after hearing the counsel for parties, we are of the opinion that the aforesaid approach of the high court is unsustainable in law and it has committed grave error in not dealing with the matter in proper perspective.12. we have already stated in brief the allegations which are made by the complainant in the said complaint in an attempt to rope in the appellants for offence under section 201 and section 120b indian penal code. we are of the opinion that even if the allegations in the complaint are taken as true and at their face value, it would not constitute offence under the aforesaid provisions.13. we first take note of provisions of section 201 indian penal code which reads as under: -201. causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to screen offender.--whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed, causes any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear, with the intention of screening the offender from legal punishment, or with that intention gives any information respecting the offence which he knows or believes to be false;if a capital offence.--shall, if the offence which he knows or believes to have been committed is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine;if punishable with imprisonment for life.--and if the offence is punishable with [imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine;if punishable with less than ten years' imprisonment.--and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for any term not extending to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both.14. as is clear from the bare reading of the provisions of the aforesaid section, an offence under the said section would be treated to have been committed when a person, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed, causes any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear. what is relevant is that the evidence which is made to disappear relates to the commission of the offence. in the present case, the allegations against the delinquent doctors of their negligence were of a much prior date. the complainant had sought to make out a case that the opinions of the four experts which were taken by the committee itself were not reflected in the report that was submitted and it is this 'evidence' which was made to disappear by the members of the inquiry committee. obviously, it is not a kind of evidence that is referred to under section 201 indian penal code. thus, on a plain reading of this provision, the allegations contained in the complaint do not make out any case of committing an offence under section 201 indian penal code.15. as mentioned above, there is a charge of conspiracy as well and, for this purpose, provisions of section 120b indian penal code are invoked. it makes the following reading:120b. punishment of criminal conspiracy.--(1) whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards, shall, where no express provision is made in this code for the punishment of such a conspiracy, be punished in the same manner as if he had abetted such offence.(2) whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy other than a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence punishable as aforesaid shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding six months, or with fine or with both.16. here again, criminal conspiracy that is referred to and defined under section 120a indian penal code has to be in furtherance of committing an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards etc. the alleged conspiracy even as per the complaint was not to commit any of the offences as mentioned above. as per the complainant himself, the so-called conspiracy, if at all, was to save the delinquent doctors in disciplinary proceedings taken against them. this provision also, therefore, has no application.17. faced with the aforesaid situation, mr. m.n. krishnamani, learned senior counsel appearing for the complainant, submitted that the allegations contained in the complaint would constitute an offence punishable under section 219 indian penal code. though no such provision is mentioned in the complaint, mr. krishnamani is right that the allegations made in the complaint may constitute an offence under the aforesaid provision and mere non-mentioning of the said provision in the complaint would not make any difference. for this reason, we have considered the argument predicated on this provision as well. we fail to understand as to how even the provisions of section 219 indian penal code applies in the instant case.18. section 219 indian penal code reads as follows:219. public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report, etc., contrary to law.--whoever, being a public servant, corruptly or maliciously makes or pronounces in any stage of a judicial proceeding, any report, order, verdict, or decision which he knows to be contrary to law, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both.19. the ingredients of the aforesaid section are: (1) the person charged is a public servant; (2) the said public servant corruptly or maliciously makes or pronounces any report, order, verdict, or decision which he knows to be contrary to law (3) such act is to be done in any stage of a judicial proceedings. without going into the controversy whether the appellants would be treated as public servant or not, it is sufficient to state that the departmental proceedings into the report given by the committee cannot be treated as 'judicial proceedings'.20. judicial proceedings are defined in section 2(i) of code of criminal procedure. to include any proceedings in the course of which evidence is or may be legally taken on oath.21. section 3 of the oaths act, 1969 reads as under:3. power to administer oaths.--(1) the following courts and persons shall have power to administer, by themselves, or subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 6, by an officer empowered by them in this behalf, oaths and affirmations in discharge of the duties imposed or in exercise of the powers conferred upon them by law, namely:(a) all courts and persons having by law or consent of parties authority to receive evidence;(b) the commanding officer of any military, naval, or air force station or ship occupied by the armed forces of the union, provided that the oath or affirmation is administered within the limits of the station.(2) without prejudice to the powers conferred by sub-section (1) or by or under any other law for the time being in force, any court, judge, magistrate or person may administer oaths and affirmations for the purpose of affidavits, if empowered in this behalf--(a) by the high court, in respect of affidavits for the purpose of judicial proceedings, or(b) by the state government, in respect of other affidavits.22. it cannot be said that the departmental proceedings, which were initiated against the delinquent doctors and in which five of the appellants constituted inquiry committee, evidence could be or would have been taken on oath.23. thus, even if, for the sake of argument, we presume that the members of the committee had side-tracked and deliberately ignored the report of the experts helping the delinquent doctors to go scot-free, it does not make out any criminal offence said to have been committed by these appellants under the provisions of indian penal code. if there was any other remedy available to the complainant, he could have availed the said remedy but insofar as the complaint filed by him for initiating proceedings against the appellants under section 201 read with section 120b indian penal code is concerned, it was not clearly maintainable.24. the result of the aforesaid discussion is to allow this appeal and quash the complaint filed by the respondent against the appellants.25. no costs.
u.u. lalit, j.1. leave granted. this appeal challenges correctness of the judgment and order dated 20.10.2010 passed by the high court of chhattisgarh at bilaspur allowing second appeal no. 242 of 1989 and setting aside concurrent decisions of the trial court and lower appellate court granting decree of eviction in favour of the appellants.2. civil suit no. 67-a of 1979 was filed by vasudev shyamji and govind shyamji, the predecessors of the appellants seeking eviction of one bhanaram sharma, predecessor of the respondents from suit house which was described in the plaint as the front portion of house no. 189/1, ward no. 18, raigarh. the eviction was sought on grounds including bona fide need. in paragraph 2 of his written statement bhanaram stated, "........it is specifically denied that the plaintiffs are owners of house no. 189/1 in ward no. 18 of raigarh town. this being a suit for eviction of a tenant the question of ownership is not relevant to the suit."3. thus though it was denied that the plaintiffs were owners of the suit house, in the very next sentence defendant bhanaram asserted that the question of ownership was not relevant in the instant suit. bhanaram entered the witness box and in his cross-examination admitted that the lease from nazul department stood in the name of plaintiffs and that the witness himself had produced the same in some other proceedings. it was further accepted that he had paid rent by money orders sent in the name of shyamji gangji, father of the plaintiffs.4. the aforesaid suit was re-numbered as civil suit no. 417a of 1986. after considering the evidence on record the trial court by its judgment and order dated 21.01.1987 decreed the suit principally on the ground that the plaintiffs required the suit house for reconstruction and for bona fide need.5. the matter having been carried in appeal by bhanaram, the lower appellate court also considered the question regarding ownership of the suit house. while considering the evidence of bhanaram, it observed, "......this witness has also admitted that lease from nazul of this property was also accepted in the name of plaintiffs and he himself has produced that lease on his behalf in other civil court." the lower appellate court affirmed the view taken by the trial court and dismissed civil appeal no. 3a/87 vide its judgment and order dated 20.03.1989.6. the heirs of bhanaram namely the respondents being aggrieved, filed second appeal no. 242 of 1989 in the high court of chhattisgarh at bilaspur. this appeal came to be allowed by the high court vide judgment and order dated 20.10.2010. it was observed by the high court that for a plaintiff to succeed in seeking eviction of tenant on the ground of bona fide need under section 12(1)(e) of the chhatisgarh accommodation control act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the "act") it was incumbent to establish that he was owner of the accommodation in question. after considering the evidence on record, particularly that of defendant bhanaram it was observed:evidence of this witness, pleadings and evidence of defendant bhanaram sharma clearly reveal that father of vasudev shyamji i.e. shyamji gangji was landlord of the suit accommodation, but was not owner of the suit accommodation. in his detailed evidence, vasudev shyamji has not stated anything to show that how he became owner of the suit accommodation.according to the high court, the fact that defendant bhanaram used to pay rent of the suit house to the father of the plaintiffs, was not sufficient to prove ownership over the suit house especially when ownership was under dispute and the plaintiffs had not adduced any evidence to prove the issue of ownership.7. the aforesaid judgment of the high court is presently under appeal. we heard mr. kamal mohan gupta, learned advocate in support of the quotation and mr. ujjal banerjee, learned advocate for the respondents. relying on the decision of this court in anar devi (smt.) v. nathu ram manu/sc/0712/1994manu/sc/0712/1994 : (1994) 4 scc 250 it was submitted by mr. gupta, learned advocate that the defendant was estopped from questioning the title of the plaintiffs and that the high court was in error in allowing the second appeal. mr. banerjee, learned advocate supported the view taken by the high court and submitted that no evidence whatsoever was led to prove ownership of the suit house which was necessary in view of section 12(1)(e) of the act.8. the relevant provision, namely, section 12(1)(e) of the act is as under:12. restriction on eviction of tenants-(1) notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or contract, no suit shall be filed in any civil court against a tenant for his eviction from any accommodation except on one or more of the following grounds only, namely:................................................(e) that the accommodation let for residential purpose is required bona fide by the landlord for occupation as a residence for himself or for any member of his family, if he is the owner thereof, or for any person for whose benefit the accommodation is held and that the landlord or such person has no other reasonably suitable residential accommodation of his own in his occupation in the city or town concerned;.....................................................9. in anar devi's case the provision which came up for consideration was section 23-a(b) of m.p. accommodation control act which was as under:23-a. special provisions for eviction of tenant on ground of bona fide requirement.--notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or contract to the contrary, a landlord may submit an application, signed and verified in a manner provided in rules 14 and 15 of order vi of the first schedule to the code of civil procedure, 1908 (v of 1908) as if it were a plaint to the rent controlling authority on one or more of the following grounds for an order directing the tenant to put the landlord in possession of the accommodation, namely--(a)...........explanation....(b) that the accommodation let for non-residential purpose of continuing or starting his business or that of any of his major sons or unmarried daughters, if he is the owner thereof or for any person for whose benefit the accommodation is held and that the landlord or such person has no other reasonably suitable non-residential accommodation of his own in his occupation in the city or town concerned:.............................................10. the relevant provision in the instant case, namely, section 12(1)(e) of the act is pari materia with section 23-a(b) which was considered in anar devi's case. the expression, "if he is the owner thereof" is common and identically placed. para 18 of the decision in anar devi's case discloses that the respondent-tenant had acknowledged the ownership of the accommodation as that of the appellant and had regarded her as the landlord in his counter notice. in the circumstances it was held that the respondent was not entitled to deny the title of the appellant to the accommodation. during the course of its judgment, this court dealt with "tenant's estoppel" as statutorily recognized in section 116 of the evidence act and observed as under:10. since the doctrine of "tenant's estoppel" could throw light on the question as to what can make a landlord to succeed in enforcing his right to recover possession of accommodation from a tenant under clause (b) of section 23a of the act, it would be advantageous to refer to its scope and applicability, before taking it up for our consideration.11. "doctrine of tenant's estoppel" which governs the relationship of landlord and tenant is founded on a contract of tenancy entered into by them, is well settled. jessel, m.r., who adverted to that doctrine in stringer's estate, shaw v. jones-ford lr 6 ch d 1 : 37 lt 233 explains it thus:where a man having no title obtains possession of land under a demise by a man in possession who assumes to give him a title as tenant, he cannot deny his landlord's title, as, for instance, if he takes for twenty-one years and he finds that the landlord has only five years' title, he cannot after five years set up against the landlord the jus tertii, though, of course, the real owner can always recover against him. that is a perfectly intelligible doctrine. he took possession under a contract to pay rent so long as he held possession under the landlord, and to give it up at the end of the term to the landlord, and having taken it in that way he is not allowed to say that the man whose title he admits and under whose title he took possession has not a title. that is a well-established doctrine. that is estoppel by contract.12. indeed, the said doctrine of tenant's estoppel, finds statutory recognition in section 116 of the indian evidence act, 1872, for short 'the evidence act', in that, it states that "no tenant of immovable property, or person claiming through such tenant, shall during the continuance of the tenancy, be permitted to deny that the landlord of such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, a title to such immovable property".13. this court in sri ram pasricha v. jagannath manu/sc/0473/1976manu/sc/0473/1976 : (1976) 4 scc 184, has also ruled that in a suit for eviction by landlord, the tenant is estopped from questioning the title of the landlord because of section 116 of the act. the judicial committee in kumar krishna prasad lal singha deo v. baraboni coal concern ltd. manu/pr/0072/1937manu/pr/0072/1937 : air 1937 pc 251, when had occasion to examine the contention based on the words 'at the beginning of the tenancy' in section 116 of the evidence act, pronounced that they do not give a ground for a person already in possession of land becoming tenant of another, to contend that there is no estoppel against his denying his subsequent lessor's title. ever since, the accepted position is that section 116 of the evidence act applies and estops even a person already in possession as tenant under one landlord from denying the title of his subsequent landlord when once he acknowledges him as his landlord by attornment or conduct. therefore, a tenant of immovable property under landlord who becomes a tenant under another landlord by accepting him to be the owner who had derived title from the former landlord, cannot be permitted to deny the latter's title, even when he is sought to be evicted by the latter on a permitted ground.14. the scope and applicability of the doctrine of "tenant's estoppel" being what we have said of it, we shall now proceed to consider the aforesaid question which has arisen with reference to the right of landlord under section 23a(b) of the act in the matter of recovery of possession of the accommodation from the tenant.11. in the instant case though defendant bhanaram in his written statement had denied ownership of the plaintiffs he went on to add, "this being a suit for eviction of a tenant, the question of ownership is not relevant to the suit". in his cross-examination he clearly admitted that the lease from nazul department stood in the name of the plaintiffs and that the witness himself had produced that document in some other proceedings. he had further admitted that he used to pay rent by money orders in the name of the father of the plaintiffs. on facts, it must be held that defendant bhanaram had without any doubt regarded the plaintiffs as landlords and owners of the suit house. this matter is thus fully covered by the decision of this court in anar devi's case and it was not open to defendant bhanaram to question the ownership of the plaintiffs-landlords.12. in the circumstances, the view taken by the high court while setting aside the concurrent decisions of the courts below was not correct and justified. we, therefore, allow this appeal. while setting aside the judgment under appeal, we restore the decisions of the trial court and the lower appellate court passed in the instant case.13. since respondents are in occupation of the suit house for last more than 40 years, we deem it appropriate to grant them time upto 31st august, 2017 to vacate and hand-over peaceful possession of the suit house to the appellants subject to the respondents filing usual undertakings within four weeks from the date of this judgment. in case no such undertakings are filed by each of the respondents within the time so stipulated, the appellants shall be free to execute the decree for eviction of the suit house.14. the appeal stands allowed in the aforesaid terms without any order as to costs.
u.u. lalit, j.1. this petition under article 32 of the constitution of india has been filed in public interest by an advocate practising in this court highlighting an incident that occurred on 01.02.2011 near mohammadabad crossing in shahjahanpur division in state of uttar pradesh. the petitioner has prayed for directions, inter alia, for finding out reasons for loss of lives, for assessment of damage to property and for grant of compensation or financial assistance to victims. he has also prayed for directions for laying down guidelines for necessary precautions and care to be taken so that such tragedy is not repeated again.2. the incident highlighted in the petition was:a. in a recruitment drive aimed at filling up 416 posts of class iv employees, indo tibetan border police (itbp, for short) had called candidates from eleven states at its headquarter located at bareilly, a small town in uttar pradesh on 1.2.2011. the aspiring candidates for said posts were required to remain present in person and submit their forms for registration. in response to said recruitment drive, aspirants started arriving at bareilly and by morning of 1.02.2011 more than two lakh aspirants had arrived. the gathering was swelling and increasing in number. the officers of itbp found themselves incapable of managing the situation because of such large gathering and as such they suspended and postponed the drive.b. the consequent resentment and shouting of slogans in protest by aspirants provoked the higher officers of itbp to use lathi charge to push the crowd. this resulted in a chaotic situation with some aspirants resorting to violence. the armed police then had to use tear gas shells to disperse the crowd. massive disturbance and lawlessness prevailed all over the town causing law and order problem. some buses were burnt and damage was caused to public and private property. in the backdrop of such situation the crowd of aspiring candidates rushed to rail and road terminals to return back to their homes.c. because of congestion and crowd in large members, the train coaches were all jam packed. hundreds of young men then climbed atop himgiri express that was on its way to eastern u.p. and bihar from where large number of aspirants had come.d. when himgiri express left shahjahanpur railway station with hundreds of men on roof top and headed towards rosa town, an accident took place at hathaurda railway over bridge near mohammadabad crossing in shahjahanpur. the railway over bridge was not tall enough and the gap between the roof of the coach and the bottom of the over bridge was hardly three feet. the train was speeding fast and by the time the young men on roof top saw the approaching bridge it was too late. at least 14 young men were crushed there and then with 20 others seriously injured having been hit by the over bridge and fallen from roof top. at this time, some high tension wire broke and fell over the train as a result of which some received electric shocks. despite this mishap, the train continued running for a while and it finally stopped some 3 kms from the place of incident.e. the roof top of coaches was full of blood. the dead bodies and injured were brought down. people rushed back to find out those who had fallen from the roof top. the train driver, guard and other employees had run away from the spot.f. the incident provoked those young aspirants, some of whom torched two coaches of the train. what followed thereafter was total chaos putting tremendous pressure on the administration in carrying out relief work and taking injured to hospitals for medical attention.3. with the aforesaid assertions this petition was filed on 7.2.2011. in the meantime railway administration had ordered an enquiry. by interim order passed by this court the respondents were directed to submit the report pursuant to enquiry instituted by them. consequently, enquiry report dated 09.09.2011 by mr. raj kumar kardam, commissioner of railway safety, northern circle, new delhi was placed on record. the record indicates that this report was preceded by preliminary report dated 23.02.2011. the relevant portions of chapter 7 of the report dated 09.09.2011 under heading "discussion" are as under:time of the accident......as per the statement of loco pilot, assistant loco pilot and guard of train no. 12332 dn jammu tawi-howrah himgiri express, the train passed shahjahanpur station at 16:23 hrs. the other records also show that this train passed shahjahanpur station at 16:23 hrs a few passengers travelling on the roofs of the coaches of this train got struck against the public foot over bridge located at lko (east) end in shahjahanpur yard near the end of the platform.7.2 speed of the train at the time of accident:diesel loco no. 11133 wdm-3d lko of train no. 12332 dn jammu tawi-howrah himgiri express was provided with medha speed time distance recording system type mrt 918. analysis of speedometer recording of his loco was made crse/chg/nr in his technical note on the accident. copy of the same is enclosed as annexure-x. as per the speed and time observations analysis done by crse/chg./nr, the speed of the train no. 12332 dn at the time of passing under the public foot over the bridge located at lko (east) end in shahjahanpur yard was assessed as 75 kmph. a few passengers travelling on the roofs of the coaches of this train got struck against the public foot over bridge located at lko (east) end in shahjahanpur yard near the end of the platform.from the above, the speed of the train no. 12332 dn at the time of accident is thus considered as 75 kmph.7.3 cause of the accident:from the particulars of injuries suffered by the roof travelers, it was observed that most of the persons injured had been hit in the upper portion of their heads. it was also evident that injuries were caused to passengers, who were traveling and sitting/standing on the roof of the coaches. an incident of hitting of an obstruction resulting in such type of injuries to the roof riders could be caused, in all probabilities by striking against the existing foot over bridge, road over bridge etc. .............................................evidence available reveals that before starting the trains, all possible efforts were made by the railway and civil officials to get the roof riders come down from roof. continuous announcements were made through public address system and loud hailers. adrm, sr. dsc/rpf, sp/railway and civil authorities were continuously monitoring the situation. however the roof riders refused to come down from the roof top of the coaches. they were also throwing stones on passengers and officials. large number of "jyreens" had also gathered at railway station and approached adrm for help and protection. in this situation, possibilities of taking incidence a turn to communal violence were very much there, as this area is a communal sensitive area and has passed through communal violence very recently (march 2010 and august 2010). in view of above, the situation had become highly volatile and had the decision to move the train was not taken at that time by the railway; the violent crowd would have damaged the station property and trains on the platforms and could have resulted in stampede and unmanageable situation at the railway station. dm/be, ig/be, dig/be, sp/be and other civil and police officials were themselves available at bareilly station to watch and control the situation. they also insisted for the movement of the trains as quickly as possible and in whatever manner. the idea was to disperse the crowd as early as possible. the situation was even being watched at rampur station by dm/rampur and sp/rampur who were themselves available at rampur station. at rosa station also adm, asp, co were present themselves to control the situation......................................................................in the above circumstances, when 2332 dn jammu tawi-howrah himgiri exp. train running at a speed of 75 kmph approached the shahjahanpur public foot over bridge at km 1237.255 km with passengers travelling and sitting/standing on the roof of the coaches, few passengers sitting and traveling on the roofs of the coaches got struck against the public foot over bridge situated at the lucknow (east) end of shahjahanpur railway station.7.5.2 there was an infringement of 55 mm in the vertical clearance at the public foot over bridge, shahjahanpur as per the indian railways, schedule of dimensions, revised, 2004. ce/p&d/nr prepared a technical note in this connection and a copy of the same is enclosed as annexure-xiv. details have been given in his letter no. 1-w/0/accident/mb/pt. iv dated 04.05.2011, a copy of which is enclosed as annexure-xv. northern railway administration has given his comments on item no. 2 of my immediate recommendations of preliminary report vide cso/nr's letter no. 10t/spl./occurrence/mb/2011 dated 20.06.2011 (annexure xxviii) and as per this railway has to take further action in removing/regularizing the infringements.railway must ensure that there are no infringements to any of the dimensions as per indian railways, schedule of dimensions, revised, 2004 for any of the overhead fixed structure like fobs, robs etc. for this a special drive should be launched by railway administration for removal/regularization of the infringements.7.5.3 on scrutiny of the steel structure register of iow/spn and bridge inspection register for rob/fobs of aden/spn, it was seen that though the inspections were being carried out regularly but the vertical clearances from the rail level to this fixed structures like fob, robs were not being measured during the inspections as this have not been prescribed in the proforma available for recording the various parameters. clearance is an important item as these may get changed due to track renewals, change in ballast cushion or any other reason resulting into the rail level being raised and may infringe the schedule of dimensions. therefore it is very much essential that proper record and upkeep of such an important item is kept.railway administration should issue a standard proforma for steel structure register and bridge inspection register to be maintained for the inspection of rob/fobs which should also include the item of measurements to be taken for clearances.7.6 role of railway officials and others:no railway officials were found to be responsible for the accident as such this aspect is not discussed in the report. the primary responsibility rests with those persons who travelled on the roofs of coaches in violation of section 156 of the indian railways act, 1989.4. in chapter 8 titled "conclusions" it was stated in the report as under:8.1 cause of the accident:8.1.1 having carefully considered the factual, material and circumstantial evidences available at my disposal, i have come to the conclusion that unusual occurrence to a few passengers travelling on the roofs of the coaches of train no. 12332 dn jammu tawi-howrah himgiri express at km 1237.255 in shahjahanpur yard between shahjahanpur and rosa railway stations on moradabad-shahjahanpur-lucknow, broad gauge, double line, non-electrified section of moradabad division of northern railway on 1.02.2011 occurred due to a few passengers sitting and travelling on the roof of the coaches got struck against the public foot over bridge situated at the lucknow (east) end of shahjahanpur railway station.the accident is classified under the heading of "failure of persons other than railway staff".5. in chapter 9 titled "remarks and recommendations" paragraphs 9.2 and 9.3 of the report were as under:9.2 railway must ensure that there are no infringements to any of the dimensions as per indian railways, schedule of dimensions, revised, 2004 for any of the overhead fixed structures like fobs, robs, etc. for this a special drive should be launched by railway administration for removal/regularization of the infringements.9.3 railway administration should issue a standard proforma for steel structure register and bridge inspection register to be maintained for the inspection of rob/fobs which should also include the item of measurements to be taken for clearances.6. after hearing the counsel and considering the aforesaid report and other documents on record, while reserving the matter for orders, this court passed following order on 17.2.2016:arguments heard.judgment reserved.learned counsel for the respondents-union of india and railways shall within three weeks from today file an additional affidavit along with the relevant documents indicating the following:(1) names and particulars of the persons who died or were injured in the incident that took place on 1th february, 2011 involving train no. 12332 dn. jammu tawi-howarh himgiri express in shahjahanpur yard.(2) whether any ex-gratia payment has been made to the next of kin to those dead or to the persons who sustained injury, if so, the amount paid to them.(3) the steps that have been taken by the railways to remove infringement of foot over-bridges (fob) in lucknow division as set out in annexure xxviii/2 to report dated 9th september, 2011 submitted by mr. raj kumar kardam, commissioner of railway safety, in regard to the incident mentioned above.(4) whether the railways are aware that there are similar other infringements, fob or rob, in regard to the other railway divisions, if so, whether any steps have been taken to identify such infringements and to rectify the same, in particular, whether the railways have taken any steps in regard to recommendation 9.2, made by the commissioner of railway safety in the report mentioned above. if no steps have been taken the reasons for the omission and the time-frame within which the railways shall do the needful.(5) the steps that have been taken or proposed to be taken by the government to avoid situations like the one referred to in the writ petition where lakhs of people descended simultaneously in the town of bareilly in connection with the proposed recruitment for i.t.b.p., in the matter of streamlining/rationalising the method of recruitments and procedures to avoid the unmanageably large crowds who came to participate in such recruitment rallies.(6) circulars/orders/notifications, if any, issued to regulate such recruitment process, rallies and crowds that assemble in connection with the same shall also be placed on record.needful be done within a period of three weeks.7. in compliance of the aforesaid order dated 17.2.2016, an affidavit has been filed by j.n. meena, div. commercial manager, northern railway, moradabad. with regard to directions 1 to 4 above-named. the affidavit states that following 20 persons died as a result of the incident in question:1. deepak s/o mohit, age 22 years, r/o village. mohva bujurg ps choori choora distt. gorakhpur.2. ram asrey s/o masaipal, age 20 years, r/o khemapur jansa, varanasi.3. anil kumar, s/o sh. ameer chandr bathora, age 25 years, r/o ps. dhanapur chandauli.4. rahul kumar, s/o vedehi saran, age 25 years, r/o hiroosa ps rohan jhansi.5. sarvoday kumar, s/o uday kumar singh, age 20 years, r/o village bansekhan tola ps aurangabad.6. shayam sundar yadav, s/o bhola nath yadav, age 26 years, r/o village yuvrajpur ps. shoej, gajipur.7. sukh ram, age 30 years, r/o unknown8. arun kumar pandey, s/o ram chandra pandey, age 20 years, r/o village bhanhi pandeypurva, p/s munshiganj garuriganj sultanpur.9. sunil kumar yadav, s/o ved prakash yadev, age 22 years, r/o laxhmanpur, p/s choori choora gorakhpur.10. devendra, s/o bhasol singh, age 20 years, r/o vill lahara, p.s. kotwali dehat, distt. aita.11. ram pravesh, s/o ramaserey, r/o mahuava ps. choori choora, gorakhpur.12. ajay kumar, s/o sukhraj, r/o vill seepur rakva, post raipur rakwa p/s choori choora gorakhpur.13. ravi kher, s/o prakash kher, r/o singar p.s. gursaray jhansh14. shailesh, s/o mithailal, r/o maupur chota tola, choori choora gorakhpur.15. purushottam, s/o gayalal yadav, r/o maupur chota tola p.s. choori choora gorakhpur.16. angad avdhesh chauhan, s/o jiut chauhan r/o maupur chota tola, p.s. choori choora gorakhpur.17. rajiv jaiswal, s/o g.n. jaisural, r/o devmoov ps gauribaja, distt. devariya.18. satish kumar, s/o pawan kumar, age 24 years, r/o village mahuani, p/s avtar nagar chhapra bihar.19. soun kumar gupta, s/o bayag bapu prasad, age 21 years, r/o village mahuani, p/s avtar nagar distt. chhapra bihar.20. saleam ansari, s/o barkhu ansari, r/o village aurai kalan, p/s bheampra, distt. baliya.8. the affidavit further stated that no ex-gratia payment was made to any injured or relative of any person who died in the incident. as regards direction no. 3 regarding lucknow division it was stated:steps taken by railways to remove infringement of foot over bridge in lucknow division. in this respect it is submitted that the action plan for the removal of infringement of fobs in lucknow division submitted by sr. dev/c northern railways lucknow vide letter no. drm/lko/engg/fob/15 dated 29.02.2016 is annexed with this affidavit.a tabular chart giving details regarding required clearances and actual available clearances as well as the nature and extent of infringement in respect of 17 cases from lucknow division was also appended to the affidavit.9. with respect to direction no. 4 what has been placed on record are communications dated 17.03.2011 and 28.5.2012 which were issued after the preliminary report dated 23.02.2011 and the aforesaid report dated 09.09.2011 respectively. these communications quoted relevant paragraphs of the respective reports and stated that a special drive be undertaken. we also have on record a letter dated 04.03.2016 from railway board addressed to chief claim officer, headquarter office, new delhi, saying that a special drive was launched vide letter dated 17.03.2011. what happened as a result of such special drive has however not been placed on record. nothing has been placed on record if similar infringements are found present in divisions other than lucknow division and if so what safety measures are undertaken or are to be undertaken and what is the road map for removing such infringements. it appears that despite paragraph 9.2 of the report dated 09.09.2011 no assessment of any kind has been undertaken in divisions other than lucknow division and consequently nothing has been placed on record.10. an affidavit has also been filed by harendra kumar, senior administrative officer, directorate general, indo tibet border police force, ministry of home affairs, government of india dealing with direction nos. 5 and 6. in response to direction no. 5 the affidavit states as under:reply to direction no. 5 - it is respectfully submitted that after this incident the respondent/itbp has not conducted open rally based recruitments. the candidates are now being called for physical efficiency test and physical standard test by post only under the supervision of a nodal officer in a limited and controlled manner. state administrative authorities at district and higher levels are being informed well in advance regarding, the time venue, date and timing of recruitments and are requested to ensure adequate arrangements to maintain law and order outside the itbp recruitment venues. the presiding officers of recruitment boards and nodal officer have been directed to maintain close liaison with district administration. a provision has been made in the standard operating procedure of the recruitment that not more than 600 candidates will be called at one recruitment center at a time for recruitment test of physical efficiency test and physical standard test etc. in the case of constable (tradesmen) recruitment, 600 candidates are being called in two days cycle at each centre.11. as regards direction no. 6, the affidavit goes on to state that standing order no. 1 of 2011 dated 14.02.2011 and standing order no. 5 of 2013 dated 26.02.2013 were issued ensuring that only 600 candidates would hereafter be called in one cycle on a particular day. to similar effect is the standing order dated 26.02.2013. however these standing orders pertain to itbp alone and it is not clear whether similar standing orders are issued and are in operation as regards other central police organisations.12. the report dated 09.09.2011 indicates that requests were made by the railway and civil officials to get the roof riders come down from the roof and announcements were made in that behalf. though the roof riders refused to come down, in view of the volatile situation, a decision was taken to move the train out of bareilly. according to the report, the civil and police officials insisted for the movement of the train as quickly as possible with an idea to disperse the crowd. one may accept this as a reasonable and proper exercise as the crowd had to be dispersed which had congregated in bareilly. however, this does not explain and justify further movement of the train for more than 60 kms from bareilly station. what is more worrisome is that the fact that train was running at a speed of 75 kilometers per hour.13. those who were in charge of railway administration in the concerned divisions ought to have taken sufficient precaution. the administration can certainly be taken to be aware of the fact that the foot-over bridges or any structures on the way could possibly be a hindrance and could have caused such incident with people in large number on roof top. the administration alone would be in a position to know about the existence of infringements with regard to certain structures and what could be possible implications if the train were to run at a great speed with large number of people on roof top. reasonable care would naturally be expected of those incharge of the administration. we therefore do not agree with the conclusion in the report that railway administration was not responsible.14. in chairman, railway board v. chandrima das manu/sc/0046/2000manu/sc/0046/2000 : (2000) 2 scc 465, while considering the liability of railways when some of the employees had taken a lady from bangladesh to rail yatri niwas and subjected her to rape, it was observed by this court,42. running of the railways is a commercial activity. establishing the yatri niwas at various railway stations to provide lodging and boarding facilities to passengers on payment of charges is a part of the commercial activity of the union of india and this activity cannot be equated with the exercise of sovereign power. the employees of the union of india who are deputed to run the railways and to manage the establishment, including the railway stations and the yatri niwas, are essential components of the government machinery which carries on the commercial activity. if any of such employees commits an act of tort, the union government, of which they are the employees, can, subject to other legal requirements being satisfied, be held vicariously liable in damages to the person wronged by those employees.15. in m.s. grewal v. deep chand sood manu/sc/0506/2001manu/sc/0506/2001 : (2001) 8 scc 151 this court considered the concept, "duty of care" in a fact situation where teachers who had accompanied school children for a picnic on the bank of a river when the mishap happened and stated as under:16. duty of care varies from situation to situation -- whereas it would be the duty of the teacher to supervise the children in the playground but the supervision, as the children leave the school, may not be required in the same degree as is in the playfield. while it is true that if the students are taken to another school building for participation in certain games, it is sufficient exercise of diligence to know that the premises are otherwise safe and secure but undoubtedly if the students are taken out to a playground near a river for fun and a swim, the degree of care required stands at a much higher degree and no deviation therefrom can be had on any count whatsoever. mere satisfaction that the river is otherwise safe for a swim by reason of popular sayings will not be a sufficient compliance. as a matter of fact the degree of care required to be taken, especially against the minor children, stands at a much higher level than adults: children need much stricter care.........................23. turning attention, however, on to the issue of vicarious liability, one redeeming feature that ought to be noticed at this juncture is that to escort the children was the duty assigned to the two teachers and till such time thus the period of escorting stands over, one cannot but ascribe it to be in the course of employment -- the two teachers were assigned to escort the students: the reason obviously being -- the children should otherwise be safe and secure and it is the act of utter negligence of the two teachers which has resulted in this unfortunate tragedy and thus it is no gainsaying that the teachers were on their own frolic and the school had done all that was possible to be done in the matter -- safety of the children obviously was of prime concern so far as the school authorities are concerned and till such time the children returned to school, safe and secure after the picnic, the course of employment, in our view continued and thus resultantly, the liability of the school.16. in chandrima das (supra) compensation of rs. 10 lakhs as awarded by the high court was upheld while in m.s. grewal (supra) this court sustained the order awarding compensation of rs. 5 lakhs in case of death.17. in the backdrop of the aforesaid precedents, in our view, it must be expected of the persons concerned to be aware of the inherent danger in allowing the train to run with such speed having large number of persons travelling on roof top. though the people who travelled on roof top also contributed to the mishap, the railway administration, in our view, was not free from blame. concluding so, we direct that the next of kin of those who died in the incident and those who sustained injuries must be duly compensated by the railway administration. those who died were obviously very young in age for they had come to compete for the jobs. taking all these factors in consideration we direct railway administration to pay:(a) compensation of rs. 5 lakhs to the next of kin in case of every death;(b) compensation of rs. 1.5 lakhs in every case of permanent disability suffered by anyone in the incident;(c) compensation of rs. 75,000/- in case of any grievous injury suffered by anyone; and(d) compensation of rs. 25,000/- in case of simple injury suffered by anyone.18. it is distressing that despite paragraph no. 9.2 of the report, the railway administration has not considered collecting data in divisions other than lucknow division whether there are any infringements as per schedule of dimensions stated in said paragraph 9.2. the administration must take every care so that such tragedy is not repeated. the first step in that behalf is to have an assessment if any such infringements exist and then to create a road-map to remove such infringements. we, therefore, direct the railway administration to implement directions stated in paragraph no. 9.2 of the report dated 09.09.2011. the committee headed by a senior officer and assisted by at least three persons from the administration having technical knowledge and expertise be constituted to have an assessment of all such infringements and to chalk out an action plan to remove such infringements. it is possible that in some cases road over bridges may have been built by state governments, municipal administrations or such bodies. nonetheless, the action plan must contemplate ways and means to deal with and remove such infringements. we direct that the committee as aforesaid be constituted within a period of four weeks from the date of this order. we hope and trust that the committee shall take appropriate steps in collecting data as stated above and creating road map or action plan to remove such infringements, in the shortest possible time.19. as regards the infringements pointed in lucknow division, the aforesaid committee shall take immediate steps. if the clearances are specified and stipulated in schedule of dimensions rules, 2004 the committee may do well to ensure strict compliance. every dispensation sought, may be considered threadbare and be granted only as a last resort.20. we direct the committee to complete the work as early as possible so that all infringements could be removed in shortest possible time and, in any case, not later than two years. we direct the committee to file periodic status reports every six months in this court.21. we also direct that copies of this order be sent by the registry to the minister, railways and secretary, railways who are requested to ensure compliance of the directions as aforesaid.22. further, all central police organisations must issue guidelines or standing order akin to standing orders nos. 1 of 2011 and 5 of 2013 of itbp ensuring that only 600 candidates or such number of candidates as could easily be managed or taken care of be called in one cycle on a particular day. for compliance in that behalf, a copy of this order be sent by the registry to the secretary, ministry of home affairs.23. with these directions, the petition stands disposed of.
rohinton fali nariman, j.1. these appeals have been argued over a number of days, but ultimately the points raised in them lie within a narrow compass.2. on 19.1.2005, the central government, in exercise of powers under section 63 of the electricity act, 2003 issued guidelines for a tariff based competitive bid process to be initiated by distribution licensees/procurers for procurement of power from generating companies. the electricity to be procured by such procurers is for the purpose of distribution and retail supply to consumers generally. on 10.2.2006, in pursuance of these guidelines, procurers in different states, namely, appellants 1 to 3 and respondents 5 to 15 (in civil appeal nos. 5239-5240 of 2016) nominated power finance corporation limited, a government of india undertaking as the nodal agency to complete a competitive bid process for development of an ultra mega power project based on linked coalmines using super critical technology of units of 660 mega watts (mw) each, plus or minus 20%, in sasan district, singrauli, madhya pradesh. on 10.2.2006, sasan power limited was incorporated as a special purpose vehicle by power finance corporation in order to implement the aforesaid purpose. on 1.8.2007, based on the competitive bidding process held by power finance corporation, reliance power limited, having quoted the lowest amount, was selected as the successful bidder, and a letter of intent was issued to reliance power ltd. the quoted tariff, year by year, for a period of 25 years, which was accepted and incorporated as schedule 11 in the power purchase agreement dated 7.8.2007 (ppa) had tariffs at an extremely depressed rate for the first two years, after which the tariffs were fixed at a significantly higher rate. on the very day that the ppa was executed between sasan power limited and the procurers for generation and sale of electricity, 100% share holding of the special purpose vehicle was acquired by reliance power limited. the ppa contains detailed clauses with respect to generation of power and the tariffs payable for the period of 25 years. apart from other provisions, we are really concerned with article 6 read with schedule 5 which provides for pre-conditions to be satisfied for declaration of a generating unit as commercial operation date, "cod", namely readiness to commence commercial operations. this happens only when a performance test, by operating the generating unit at 95% of the contracted capacity as existing on the effective date on a continuous running basis for 72 hours, has been certified by an independent engineer, by giving a final test certificate to the aforesaid effect. the ppa also contains various other clauses which will be set out during the course of this judgment.3. the bone of contention in these matters is whether the cod for unit no. 3, which was the first unit to be commissioned, had been achieved on 31.3.2013. if it had, then under schedule 11 to the ppa, the entire first year would get exhausted in one day, i.e., 31st march being the end of the contract year, for which tariff payable would be at the rate of 69 paise per unit. if not, then it is only on and from the commencement of cod that such year would begin, which, according to the appellants before us, would only begin on 16.8.2013 when a final test certificate in accordance with article 6 of the ppa was given by the independent engineer to the effect that 95% of the contracted capacity had been achieved for a continuous period of 72 hours. we are informed that if the cod is said to be on 31.3.2013, as has been held by the appellate tribunal, the consumers would have to pay a sum of over ` 1000 crores, being the differential tariff that would apply.4. the date for commissioning the first unit was fixed under the ppa as 7th may, 2013. however, under schedule 11 thereof, this date was preponed to 27th november, 2012. as sasan kept postponing this date, it appears that the commissioning tests for generating unit no. 3 commenced from 20.3.2013. various emails were exchanged from 27.3.2013 to 30.3.2013 between sasan and the western region load dispatch centre (hereinafter referred to as "the wrldc"), a statutory authority under the electricity act, 2003. it is the case of sasan that though they were ready to deliver electricity on 31.3.2013 at 95% of the contracted capacity of 620 mw of the unit, they could not do so as wrldc did not give them the necessary green signal to go ahead. they relied heavily upon the independent engineer's test certificate dated 30.3.2013 to show that a cod took place on the following day, which we will consider in some detail later. at this stage, suffice it to say that a petition was filed by wrldc before the central electricity regulatory commission (cerc) on 25.4.2013, in which it was prayed:1. kindly look into the veracity of the certificate issued by the independent engineer in view of deliberate suppression and misrepresentation of the facts and issue suitable directions to respondent no. 2 to desist from such act.2. kindly look into the matter of respondent no. 1 including into intentional mis-declaration of parameters related to commercial mechanism in vogue and has purported to declare the part (de-rated) capacity of 101.38 mw as commercial on the grounds of load restriction by wrldc and issued suitable directions in the matter.3. issue specific guidelines with respect to declaration of cod of the generators who are not governed by the cerc (terms and conditions of tariff) regulations, 2009 to be in line with cerc regulations so that the same can be implemented in a dispute free manner and eliminate any possibility of gaming by generator.4. hon'ble commission may give any further directions as deemed fit in the circumstances of the case.5. this petition was allowed by the cerc by its order dated 8.8.2014, by which it first set out five issues as follows:(a) whether the petition filed by wrldc is maintainable?(b) whether the certificate issued by ie is in accordance with the ppa and if not, whether ie has made deliberate suppression or misrepresentation of facts while issuing the certificate?(c) whether cod of the station as declared by spl is in accordance with the ppa?(d) whether the respondent no. 1 has indulged in mis-declaration of parameters relating to commercial mechanism in vogue?(e) guidelines with regard to the commercial operation of a generating station which is not regulated by the tariff regulations of the commission.6. the cerc answered issues (a), (b), (c), and (e) in the affirmative, and issue (d) in the negative. ultimately the commission arrived at the conclusion that cod had not been achieved on 31.3.2013 but had only been achieved later, on 16th august of the same year. this finding was set aside by the appellate tribunal by its judgment dated 31.3.2016, in which the appellate tribunal found that though cod had not been achieved on 31.3.2013 in accordance with the ppa, but that the procurers under the ppa had waived their right to demand performance at 95%, and that the performance of unit no. 3, which was only roughly 17% of its contracted capacity, was accepted by all the procurers, and that therefore there was a waiver of this essential condition, which would then entitle the generator to treat 31.3.2013 as the date on which commercial operation of unit no. 3 commenced. it is the correctness of this judgment which has been assailed by the various appellants before us.7. mr. jayant bhushan, learned senior counsel, mr. gopal jain, learned senior counsel, mr. m.g. ramachandran, learned counsel, mr. purusha indra kavrar, learned aag, and mr. alok shankar, learned counsel appearing for the appellants have relied heavily on article 6.3.1 read with schedule 5 of the ppa, and stated that this is an article which does not merely reflect the individual rights and liabilities of the generator and procurers of electricity but would also sound in public interest inasmuch as the declaration of cod would have effect on the tariff that is payable by consumers generally. they, therefore, argued that article 6.3.1 cannot be waived as a matter of law. they also argued that it cannot also be waived as a matter of fact inasmuch as when the ppa expressly allowed a certain provision to be waived, it expressly stated so. in this regard, articles 3.1.2, 4.4.2(b) 10.1(c), 10.2(c) were pointed out by them. referring to article 18.3 of the ppa, it was argued that the said article is not a substantive provision for waiver, but only a provision dealing with the manner in which waiver is to be exercised, and has reference only to the aforesaid articles. further, even assuming that there was a waiver, such waiver took place as late as 15.4.2013 when the last communication from uttarakhand power was received. there was, therefore, no waiver of the aforesaid condition on 31.3.2013. they also argued that as a matter of fact the emails exchanged between the parties would show that the lead procurer and all the other procurers had in fact never consented to 31.3.2013 as being the cod for the purpose of the ppa. they also argued that really speaking any such alleged waiver was not a waiver at all, but an amendment to the ppa which would require the commission's consent under article 18.1, inasmuch as it would affect the tariff payable by consumers. they also argued that it is clear from a reading of a chart which showed generation from march to august, 2013 that sasan was not able to achieve anywhere near 95% of contracted capacity until 16th august which is when the cod took place on facts. they also pointed out that, for example, in the month of july, there was no supply of power at all by sasan power. ultimately, it was stated that the independent engineer's certificate dated 30.3.2013 was a document made only to favour sasan, so that sasan could swallow one entire year of tariff in one day, so that the consumer would have to pay the higher tariff for what is in reality the first year, but is now being treated as the second year of generation and supply.8. as against this, shri chidambaram and shri sibal, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of sasan power ltd., have argued that as against 69 and 70 paise per unit for electricity supplied under the ppa, the procurers were in fact procuring electricity at much higher rates. it was the procurers themselves, therefore, who kept telling sasan to supply power as soon as possible. for this, they relied, in particular, on the minutes of a meeting dated 27.2.2013 between the procurers and sasan, in which the procurers unequivocally stated that any time upto 31.3.2013, the power generation should begin from unit no. 3. this was because the moment such power generation began, whether it was 69 paise or 70 paise for the second year, the aforesaid tariff was much, much lower than what the procurers would have to pay otherwise. it was their argument that it was only at the behest of the procurers themselves that the cod was declared on 31.3.2013. they further argued that on a correct reading of emails and letters exchanged between the parties, the lead procurer and all other procurers had actually and unequivocally waived the requirement of 95% of contracted capacity demand and that the appellate tribunal was right in this behalf. countering the arguments of the appellant, they referred to and relied upon section 63 of the indian contract act, 1872 to buttress their submission that waiver is a right granted by the contract act and does not depend upon the ppa. therefore, whatever the construction of article 18.3 of the ppa, it is clear that the contract act itself gives them this right which the procurers themselves have exercised in accordance with law, for the very good reason that they wanted the supply of cheap energy at any cost, even at the cost of being at 17% instead of 95% of contracted demand. it was also their case that they were ready to supply electricity on 31st march at 95% of the contracted demand, but unfortunately wrldc prevented them from doing so, and that the independent engineer's certificate had been wrongly castigated by cerc, as was correctly held by the appellate tribunal. the independent engineer laid bare the facts correctly and therefore did not give a false or wrong certificate as was found by cerc. they also met an argument raised by the appellant that haryana at least had waived its right without prejudice to its other rights and contentions. this was met by stating that haryana accounted only for roughly 12% of the total electricity demanded by all the procurers and that as per a clause in the ppa, if the lead procurer and the other procurers constitute 65% or more, they can bind all the other procurers.9. in order to appreciate the rival submissions, it is necessary to refer to the relevant provisions of the ppa, which reads as follows:1. definitionsthe terms used in this agreement, unless as defined below or repugnant to the context, shall have the same meaning as assigned to them by the electricity act, 2003 and the rules or regulations framed thereunder, including those issued/framed by appropriate commission (as defined hereunder), as amended or re-enacted from time to time.the following terms when used in this agreement shall have the respective meanings, as specified below:6: synchronization, commissioning and commercial operation6.1 synchronisation6.1.1 the seller shall give the procurers and rldc at least sixty (60) days advance preliminary written notice and at least thirty (30) days advance final written notice, of the date on which it intends to synchronize a unit to the grid system, provided that no unit shall be synchronized prior to 36 months from ntp.6.1.2 subject to article 6.1.1, a unit may be synchronized by the seller to the grid system when it meets all connection conditions prescribed in any grid code then in effect and otherwise meets all other indian legal requirements for synchronization to the grid system.6.2 commissioning6.2.1 the seller shall be responsible for ensuring that each unit is commissioned in accordance with schedule 5 at its own cost, risk and expense.6.2.2 the seller shall give all the procurers and the independent engineer not less than ten (10) days prior written notice of commissioning test of each unit.6.2.3 the seller (individually), the procurers (jointly) and the independent engineer (individually) shall each designate qualified and authorized representatives to witness and monitor commissioning test of each unit.6.2.4 testing and measuring procedures applied during each commissioning test shall be in accordance with the codes, practices and procedures mentioned in schedule 5 of this agreement.6.2.5 within five (5) days of a commissioning test, the seller shall provide the procurers (jointly) and the independent engineer with copies of the detailed commissioning test results. within five (5) days of receipt of the commissioning test results, the independent engineer shall provide to the procurers and the seller in writing, his findings from the evaluation of commissioning test results, either in the form of final test certificate certifying the matters specified in article 6.3.1 or the reasons for non-issuance of final test certificate.6.3 commercial operation6.3.1 a unit shall be commissioned on the day after the date when all the procurers receive a final test certificate of the independent engineer stating that:a) the commissioning tests have been carried out in accordance with schedule 5 and are acceptable to him; andb) the results of the performance test show that the unit's tested capacity, is not less than ninety five (95) percent of its contracted capacity as existing on the effective date.6.3.2 if a unit fails a commissioning test, the seller may retake the relevant test, within a reasonable period after the end of the previous test, with three (3) day's prior written notice to the procurers and the independent engineer. provided however, the procurers shall have a right to require deferment of any such re-tests for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days, without incurring any liability for such deferment, if the procurers are unable to provide evacuation of power to be generated, due to reasons outside the reasonable control of the procurers or due to inadequate demand in the grid.6.3.3 the seller may retake the performance test by giving at least fifteen (15) days advance notice in writing to the procurers, up to eight (8) times, during a period of one hundred and eighty (180) days ("initial performance retest period") from a unit's cod in order to demonstrate an increased tested capacity over and above as provided in article 6.3.1 (b). provided however, the procurers shall have a right to require deferment of any such re-tests for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days, without incurring any liability for such deferment, if the procurers are unable to provide evacuation of power to be generated, due to reasons outside the reasonable control of the procurers or due to inadequate demand in the grid.6.3.4 (i) if a unit's tested capacity after the most recent performance test mentioned in article 6.3.3 has been conducted, is less than its contracted capacity as existing on the effective date, the unit shall be de-rated with the following consequences in each case with effect from the date of completion of such most recent test:a) the unit's contracted capacity shall be reduced to its tested capacity, as existing at the most recent performance test referred to in article 6.3.3 and quoted capacity charges shall be paid with respect to such reduced contracted capacity;b) the quoted non escalable capacity charge (in rs. /kwh) shall be reduced by the following in the event tested capacity is less than ninety five (95%) per cent of its contracted capacity as existing on the effective date: rs. 0.25/kwh x [1 - {(tested capacity of all commissioned units + contracted capacity of all units not commissioned at the effective date)/contracted capacity of all units at the effective date})c) the seller shall not be permitted to declare the available capacity of the unit at a level greater than its tested capacity;d) the availability factor of the derated unit shall be calculated by reference to the reduced contracted capacity; ande) the capital cost and each element of the capital structure schedule shall be reduced in proportion to the reduction in the contracted capacity of the power station as a result of that de-rating (taking into account the contracted capacity of any unit which has yet to be commissioned).(ii) if at the end of initial performance retest period or the date of the eighth performance test mentioned in article 6.3.3, whichever is earlier, the tested capacity is less than the contracted capacity (as existing on the date of this agreement), the consequences mentioned in article 8.2.2 shall apply for a period of one year. provided that such consequences shall apply with respect to the tested capacity existing at the end of initial performance retest period or the date of the eighth performance test mentioned in article 6.3.3, whichever is earlier.6.3.5 if a unit's tested capacity as at the end of the initial performance retest period or the date of the eighth performance test mentioned in article 6.3.3, whichever is earlier, is found to be more than it's contracted capacity as existing on the effective date, the tested capacity shall be deemed to be the unit's contracted capacity if any procurer/s agrees and intimates the same to the seller within thirty (30) days of receipt of the results of the last performance test to purchase such excess tested capacity and also provide to the seller additional letter of credit and collateral arrangement (if applicable) for payments in respect of such excess tested capacity agreed to be purchased by such procurer/s. in case the procurer/s decide not to purchase such excess tested capacity, the seller shall be free to sell such excess tested capacity to any third party and the unit's contracted capacity shall remain unchanged, notwithstanding that the tested capacity exceeded the contracted capacity.provided that in all the above events, the seller shall be liable to obtain/maintain all the necessary consents (including initial consents), permits and approvals including those required under the environmental laws for generation of such excess tested capacity.6.4 costs incurred.the seller expressly agrees that all costs incurred by him in synchronizing, connecting, commissioning and/or testing or retesting a unit shall be solely and completely to his account and the procurer's or procurers' liability shall not exceed the amount of the energy charges payable for such power output, as set out in schedule 7.18: miscellaneous provisions18.1 amendmentthe agreement may only be amended or supplemented by a written agreement between the parties and after duly obtaining the approval of the appropriate commission, where necessary.18.3. no waivera valid waiver by a party shall be in writing and executed by an authorized representative of that party. neither the failure by any party to insist on the performance of the terms, conditions, and provisions of this agreement nor time or other indulgence granted by any party to the other parties shall act as a waiver of such breach or acceptance of any variation or the relinquishment of any such right or any other right under this agreement, which shall remain in full force and effect.schedule 5: commissioning and testing1.1 performance testi. (a) the performance test shall be conducted under any and all ambient conditions (temperature, humidity etc.) and any and all fuel qualities that may exist during the time of the performance test and no corrections in final gross and net output of the unit will be allowed as a result of prevailing ambient conditions or fuel quality.(b) the correction curves will only be used if the grid system operation during the performance test exceeds electrical system limits.(c) the performance test shall be deemed to have demonstrated the contracted capacity of the unit under all designed conditions and therefore no adjustments shall be made on account of fuel quality or ambient conditions.(d) the seller shall perform in respect of each unit a performance test, which such unit shall be deemed to have passed if it operates continuously for seventy two consecutive hours at or above ninety five (95) percent of its contracted capacity as existing on the effective date and within the electrical system limits and the functional specifications.ii. for the purposes of any performance test pursuant to this sub-article 1.1, the electrical system limits to be achieved shall be as follows:(a) voltagethe unit must operate within the voltage levels described in the functional specification for the duration of the performance test. if, during the performance test, voltage tests cannot be performed due to grid system, data supplied from tests of the generator step-up transformers and generators supplied by the manufacturers shall be used to establish the ability of the unit to operate within the specified voltage limits.(b) grid system frequencythe unit shall operate within the grid system frequency levels described in the functional specification for the duration of the performance test.(c) power factorthe unit shall operate within the power factor range described in the functional specification for the duration of the performance test. if, during the performance test, power factor tests cannot be performed due to the grid system, data supplied from tests of the generators and the generator step-up transformers supplied by the manufacturers shall be used to establish the ability of the unit to operate within the specified power factor range.(d) fuel quality and cooling water temperaturethe unit must operate to its contracted capacity with fuel quality and water temperature available at the time of testing and no adjustment shall be allowed for any variation in these parameters.iii. as a part of the performance test, the seller shall demonstrate that the unit meets the functional specifications for ramping rate as mentioned in schedule 4. for this purpose, representative samples of ramp rates shall be taken, by ramping up or down the gross turbine load while maintaining the required temperature and temperature differences associated with each ramp rate within the turbine while maintaining all other operational parameters within equipment limits.iv. further, as a part of the performance test, the unit shall be tested for compliance with parameters of supercritical technology.1.2 testing and measurement procedures applied during performance test shall be in accordance with codes, practices or procedures as generally/normally applied for the performance tests.1.3 the seller shall comply with the prevalent laws, rules and regulations as applicable to the provisions contained in this schedule from time to time.schedule 11: quoted tariff10. it is also necessary to set out the relevant provisions of the electricity act, 2003. sections 28, 29, 61, 62 and 63 of the electricity act, 2003 read as under:section 28. functions of regional load despatch centre:(1) the regional load despatch centre shall be the apex body to ensure integrated operation of the power system in the concerned region.(2) the regional load despatch centre shall comply with such principles, guidelines and methodologies in respect of the wheeling and optimum scheduling and despatch of electricity as the central commission may specify in the grid code.(3) the regional load despatch centre shall -(a) be responsible for optimum scheduling and despatch of electricity within the region, in accordance with the contracts entered into with the licensees or the generating companies operating in the region;(b) monitor grid operations;(c) keep accounts of quantity of electricity transmitted through the regional grid;(d) exercise supervision and control over the inter-state transmission system; and(e) be responsible for carrying out real time operations for grid control and despatch of electricity within the region through secure and economic operation of the regional grid in accordance with the grid standards and the grid code.(4) the regional load despatch centre may levy and collect such fee and charges from the generating companies or licensees engaged in inter-state transmission of electricity as may be specified by the central commission.section 29. compliance of directions: --- (1) the regional load despatch centre may give such directions and exercise such supervision and control as may be required for ensuring stability of grid operations and for achieving the maximum economy and efficiency in the operation of the power system in the region under its control.(2) every licensee, generating company, generating station, sub-station and any other person connected with the operation of the power system shall comply with the directions issued by the regional load despatch centres under sub-section (1).(3) all directions issued by the regional load despatch centres to any transmission licensee of state transmission lines or any other licensee of the state or generating company (other than those connected to inter state transmission system) or sub-station in the state shall be issued through the state load despatch centre and the state load despatch centres shall ensure that such directions are duly complied with the licensee or generating company or sub-station.(4) the regional power committee in the region may, from time to time, agree on matters concerning the stability and smooth operation of the integrated grid and economy and efficiency in the operation of the power system in that region.(5) if any dispute arises with reference to the quality of electricity or safe, secure and integrated operation of the regional grid or in relation to any direction given under sub-section (1), it shall be referred to the central commission for decision: provided that pending the decision of the central commission, the directions of the regional load despatch centre shall be complied with by the state load despatch centre or the licensee or the generating company, as the case may be.(6) if any licensee, generating company or any other person fails to comply with the directions issued under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding rupees fifteen lacs.section 61. tariff regulations: the appropriate commission shall, subject to the provisions of this act, specify the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff, and in doing so, shall be guided by the following, namely:(a) the principles and methodologies specified by the central commission for determination of the tariff applicable to generating companies and transmission licensees;(b) the generation, transmission, distribution and supply of electricity are conducted on commercial principles;(c) the factors which would encourage competition, efficiency, economical use of the resources, good performance and optimum investments;(d) safeguarding of consumers' interest and at the same time, recovery of the cost of electricity in a reasonable manner;(e) the principles rewarding efficiency in performance;(f) multi year tariff principles;(g) that the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of electricity and also, reduces cross-subsidies in the manner specified by the appropriate commission;(h) the promotion of co-generation and generation of electricity from renewable sources of energy;(i) the national electricity policy and tariff policy:provided that the terms and conditions for determination of tariff under the electricity (supply) act, 1948, the electricity regulatory commission act, 1998 and the enactments specified in the schedule as they stood immediately before the appointed date, shall continue to apply for a period of one year or until the terms and conditions for tariff are specified under this section, whichever is earlier.section 62. determination of tariff: (1) the appropriate commission shall determine the tariff in accordance with the provisions of this act for -(a) supply of electricity by a generating company to a distribution licensee: provided that the appropriate commission may, in case of shortage of supply of electricity, fix the minimum and maximum ceiling of tariff for sale or purchase of electricity in pursuance of an agreement, entered into between a generating company and a licensee or between licensees, for a period not exceeding one year to ensure reasonable prices of electricity;(b) transmission of electricity;(c) wheeling of electricity;(d) retail sale of electricity:provided that in case of distribution of electricity in the same area by two or more distribution licensees, the appropriate commission may, for promoting competition among distribution licensees, fix only maximum ceiling of tariff for retail sale of electricity.(2) the appropriate commission may require a licensee or a generating company to furnish separate details, as may be specified in respect of generation, transmission and distribution for determination of tariff.(3) the appropriate commission shall not, while determining the tariff under this act, show undue preference to any consumer of electricity but may differentiate according to the consumer's load factor, power factor, voltage, total consumption of electricity during any specified period or the time at which the supply is required or the geographical position of any area, the nature of supply and the purpose for which the supply is required.(4) no tariff or part of any tariff may ordinarily be amended, more frequently than once in any financial year, except in respect of any changes expressly permitted under the terms of any fuel surcharge formula as may be specified.(5) the commission may require a licensee or a generating company to comply with such procedures as may be specified for calculating the expected revenues from the tariff and charges which he or it is permitted to recover. (6) if any licensee or a generating company recovers a price or charge exceeding the tariff determined under this section, the excess amount shall be recoverable by the person who has paid such price or charge along with interest equivalent to the bank rate without prejudice to any other liability incurred by the licensee.section 63. determination of tariff by bidding process: notwithstanding anything contained in section 62, the appropriate commission shall adopt the tariff if such tariff has been determined through transparent process of bidding in accordance with the guidelines issued by the central government.11. since counsel for the opposing parties have made wide ranging arguments on the effect of article 18 and waiver as a legal concept, it is important first to find out as to which pigeonhole the facts of the present case fit - whether the emails exchanged by the parties would amount to an "amendment" governed by article 18.1, or whether it would amount to a "waiver" governed by article 18.3.12. a perusal of the emails exchanged between the parties would show that the parties did not intend to amend by a written agreement any of the provisions of the ppa. whereas an amendment of the ppa under article 18.1 would be bilateral, a waiver of a provision of the ppa would be unilateral under article 18.3.13. in order to better understand, conceptually, the difference between amendment and waiver, it is necessary to advert to sections 1, 62 and 63 of the indian contract act, 1872.section 1. short title.-this act may be called the indian contract act, 1872.extent, commencements.-it extends to the whole of india except the state of jammu and kashmir; and it shall come into force on the first day of september, 1872.nothing herein contained shall affect the provisions of any statute, act or regulation not hereby expressly repealed, nor any usage or custom of trade, nor any incident of any contract, not inconsistent with the provisions of this act.section 62. effect of novation, rescission, and alteration of contract.if the parties to a contract agree to substitute a new contract for it, or to rescind or alter it, the original contract need not be performed.section 63. promisee may dispense with or remit performance of promise.- every promise may dispense with or remit, wholly or in part, the performance of the promise made to him, or may extend the time for such performance, or may accept instead of it any satisfaction which he thinks fit.14. under section 62, apart from novation of a contract and rescission of a contract, alteration of a contract is mentioned. alteration is understood here, in the facts of the present case, in the sense of amendment. it is settled law that an amendment to a contract being in the nature of a modification of the terms of the contract must be read in and become a part of the original contract in order to amount to an alteration under section 62 of the indian contract act. this is clear from juggilal kamlapat v. n.v. internationale crediet-en-handels vereeninging 'rotterdam' manu/wb/0013/1955manu/wb/0013/1955 : air 1955 cal 65 in paragraph 15 of which it is stated:the effect of the alterations or modifications is that there is a new arrangement; in the language of viscount haldane in morris v. baron & co. (1) (1918 appeal cases, 1 at 17), "a new contract containing as an entirety the old terms together with and as modified by the new terms incorporated." the modifications are read into and become part and parcel of the original contract. the original terms also continue to be part of the contract and are not rescinded and/or superseded except in so far as they are inconsistent with the modifications. those of the original terms which cannot make sense when read with the alterations must be rejected. in my view the arbitration clause in this case is in no way inconsistent with the subsequent modifications and continues to subsist. [para 15]15. no such thing having occurred on the present facts, it is clear that there is in fact no amendment by written agreement to the ppa. to this extent, learned counsel for sasan are correct.16. the relevant section therefore that would apply on the facts of the present case is section 63. at this stage, it is important to advert to an argument made by counsel for the appellants that article 18.3 only refers to waivers that can expressly be made under various provisions of the agreement and not to article 6 which, according to learned counsel, cannot be waived under the ppa. assuming that such argument is correct, and that article 18.3 refers only to the mode of carrying out a waiver under the ppa, yet it is clear that section 63 would operate on the facts of this case. this is for the reason that, when read with section 1 of the contract act, it becomes clear that the ppa is subject to section 63 of the contract act, which would allow a promise to dispense with or remit, wholly or in part, the performance of the promise made to him, and accept instead of it any satisfaction which he thinks fit. this is made clear in an interesting judgment by chief justice stone in official assignee of bombay v. madholal sindhu ilr 1948 (2) bom 1. the learned chief justice after setting out the facts had this to say on the effect of section 1 of the contract act:the indian contract act of 1872 applies to all contracts in india and with regard to a pawn is a codification of the english common law. speaking of the common law right to sell mr. justice story in his commentaries on the law of bailments, eighth edition, says at p. 262:another right resulting, by the common law, from the contract of pledge is the right to sell the pledge, where there has been a default in the pledge in complying with his engagement, but a sale before default would be a conversion. such a right does not divest the general property of the pawner but still leave in him (as we shall presently see) a right of redemption.and at p. 263:the common law of england, existing in the time of glanville, seems to have required a judicial process to justify the sale, or at least to destroy the right of redemption. but the law as at present established leaves an election to the pawner. he may file a bill in equity against the pawner for a foreclosure and sale; or, he may proceed to sell ex mero motu, upon giving notice of his intention to the pledger.the terms of an instrument of pledge, such as there is in this case, giving an unqualified power of sale, are inconsistent with the provisions of section 176 of the indian contract act, and, therefore, by virtue of section 1 of that act must give place to the express provisions of the act: see chitguppi & co. v. vinaya kashinath [(1920) 45 bom. 157 : s.c. 22 bom l.r. 959].the group of sections in the indian contract act dealing with bailment commence with section 148, and it is to be observed that in the sections 152, 163, 171 and 174 the power is given to contract out of the act. in the former section the words are "in the absence of any special contract" and in the three latter sections the expression used is "in the absence of any contract to contrary". in my opinion, therefore, except in these four sections, the provisions of the act with regard to bailment are mandatory: see the co-operative hindustan bank, ltd. v. surendranath de [(1931) 59 cal. 667.].17. it is thus clear that if on facts there is a waiver of a provision of the ppa by one of the parties to the ppa, then section 63 of the contract act will operate in order to give effect to such waiver.18. at this juncture, it is important to understand what exactly is meant by waiver. in jagad bandhu chatterjee v. nilima rani manu/sc/0490/1969manu/sc/0490/1969 : (1969) 3 scc 445, this court held:in india the general principle with regard to waiver of contractual obligation is to be found in section 63 of the indian contract act. under that section it is open to a promise to dispense with or remit, wholly or in part, the performance of the promise made to him or he can accept instead of it any satisfaction which he thinks fit. under the indian law neither consideration nor an agreement would be necessary to constitute waiver. this court has already laid down in waman shriniwas kini v. ratilal bhagwandas & co. [manu/sc/0171/1959manu/sc/0171/1959 : 1959 supp 2 scr 217, 226] that waiver is the abandonment of a right which normally everybody is at liberty to waive. "a waiver is nothing unless it amounts to a release. it signifies nothing more than an intention not to insist upon the right". it is well-known that in the law of pre-emption the general principle which can be said to have been uniformly adopted by the indian courts is that acquiescence in the sale by any positive act amounting to relinquishment of a pre-emptive right has the effect of the forfeiture of such a right. so far as the law of pre-emption is concerned the principle of waiver is based mainly on mohammedan jurisprudence. the contention that the waiver of the appellant's right under section 26-f of the bengal tenancy act must be founded on contract or agreement cannot be acceded to and must be rejected. [para 5]19. in p. dasa muni reddy v. p. appa rao manu/sc/0392/1974manu/sc/0392/1974 : (1974) 2 scc 725, this court held:waiver is an intentional relinquishment of a known right or advantage, benefit, claim or privilege which except for such waiver the party would have enjoyed. waiver can also be a voluntary surrender of a right. the doctrine of waiver has been applied in cases where landlords claimed forfeiture of lease or tenancy because of breach of some condition in the contract of tenancy. the doctrine which the courts of law will recognise is a rule of judicial policy that a person will not be allowed to take inconsistent position to gain advantage through the aid of courts. waiver sometimes partakes of the nature of an election. waiver is consensual in nature. it implies a meeting of the minds. it is a matter of mutual intention. the doctrine does not depend on misrepresentation. waiver actually requires two parties, one party waiving and another receiving the benefit of waiver. there can be waiver so intended by one party and so understood by the other. the essential element of waiver is that there must be a voluntary and intentional relinquishment of a right. the voluntary choice is the essence of waiver. there should exist an opportunity for choice between the relinquishment and an enforcement of the right in question. it cannot be held that there has been a waiver of valuable rights where the circumstances show that what was done was involuntary. there can be no waiver of a non-existent right. similarly, one cannot waive that which is not one's as a right at the time of waiver. some mistake or misapprehension as to some facts which constitute the underlying assumption without which parties would not have made the contract may be sufficient to justify the court in saying that there was no consent. [para 13]20. regard being had to the aforesaid decisions, it is clear that when waiver is spoken of in the realm of contract, section 63 of the indian contract act governs. but it is important to note that waiver is an intentional relinquishment of a known right, and that, therefore, unless there is a clear intention to relinquish a right that is fully known to a party, a party cannot be said to waive it. but the matter does not end here. it is also clear that if any element of public interest is involved and a waiver takes place by one of the parties to an agreement, such waiver will not be given effect to if it is contrary to such public interest. this is clear from a reading of the following authorities.21. in lachoo mal v. radhey shyam manu/sc/0715/1971manu/sc/0715/1971 : (1971) 1 scc 619, it was held:the general principle is that everyone has a right to waive and to agree to waive the advantage of a law or rule made solely for the benefit and protection of the individual in his private capacity which may be dispensed with without infringing any public right or public policy. thus the maxim which sanctions the non-observance of the statutory provision is cuilibet licet renuntiare juri pro se introducto. (see maxwell on interpretation of statutes, eleventh edn., pp. 375 and 376). if there is any express prohibition against contracting out of a statute in it then no question can arise of anyone entering into a contract which is so prohibited but where there is no such prohibition it will have to be seen whether an act is intended to have a more extensive operation as a matter of public policy. [para 6]22. in indira bai v. nand kishore manu/sc/0250/1991manu/sc/0250/1991 : (1990) 4 scc 668, it was held:the test to determine the nature of interest, namely, private or public is whether the right which is renunciated is the right of party alone or of the public also in the sense that the general welfare of the society is involved. if the answer is latter then it may be difficult to put estoppel as a defence. but if it is right of party alone then it is capable of being abnegated either in writing or by conduct. [para 5]23. in krishna bahadur v. purna theatre manu/sc/0667/2004manu/sc/0667/2004 : (2004) 8 scc 229, it was held:the principle of waiver although is akin to the principle of estoppel; the difference between the two, however, is that whereas estoppel is not a cause of action; it is a rule of evidence; waiver is contractual and may constitute a cause of action; it is an agreement between the parties and a party fully knowing of its rights has agreed not to assert a right for a consideration.a right can be waived by the party for whose benefit certain requirements or conditions had been provided for by a statute subject to the condition that no public interest is involved therein. whenever waiver is pleaded it is for the party pleading the same to show that an agreement waiving the right in consideration of some compromise came into being. statutory right, however, may also be waived by his conduct. [para 9]24. it is thus clear that if there is any element of public interest involved, the court steps in to thwart any waiver which may be contrary to such public interest.25. on the facts of this case, it is clear that the moment electricity tariff gets affected, the consumer interest comes in and public interest gets affected. this is in fact statutorily recognized by the electricity act in sections 61 to 63 thereof. under section 61, the appropriate commission, when it specifies terms and conditions for determination of tariff, is to be guided inter alia by the safeguarding of the consumer interest and the recovery of the cost of electricity in a reasonable manner. for this purpose, factors that encourage competition, efficiency and good performance are also to be heeded. under section 62 of the act, the appropriate commission is to determine such tariff in accordance with the principles contained in section 61. the present case, however, is covered by section 63, which begins with a non obstante clause stating that notwithstanding anything contained in section 62, the appropriate commission shall adopt the tariff if such tariff has been determined through a transparent process of bidding in accordance with the guidelines issued by the central government. the guidelines dated 19.1.2005 issued by the central government under section 63 make it clear that such guidelines are framed with the following objectives in mind:these guidelines have been framed under the above provisions of section 63 of the act. the specific objectives of these guidelines are as follows:1) promote competitive procurement of electricity by distribution licensees;2) facilitate transparency and fairness in procurement processes;3) facilitate reduction of information asymmetries for various bidders;4) protect consumer interests by facilitating competitive conditions in procurement of electricity;5) enhance standardization and reduce ambiguity and hence time for materialization of projects;6) provide flexibility to suppliers on internal operations while ensuring certainty on availability of power and tariffs for buyers.clause 2.3 of the said guidelines reads as follows:2.3. unless explicitly specified in these guidelines, the provisions of these guidelines shall be binding on the procurer. the process to be adopted in event of any deviation proposed from these guidelines is specified later in these guidelines under para 5.16.26. paragraph 4 of the aforesaid guidelines relates to tariff structure and paragraph 4.11 in particular, which relates to energy charges, is as follows:4.11 where applicable, the energy charges payable during the operation of the contract shall be related on the base energy charges specified in the bid with suitable provision for escalation. in case the bidder provides firm energy charge rates for each of the years of the contract term, the same shall be permitted in the tariffs.27. para 5.4 then speaks of a model power purchase agreement proposed to be entered into with the seller of electricity as follows:(ii) model ppa proposed to be entered into with the seller of electricity. the ppa shall include necessary details on: risk allocation between parties; technical requirements on minimum load conditions; assured off take levels; force majeure clauses as per industry standards; lead times for scheduling of power; default conditions and cure thereof, and penalties; payment security proposed to be offered by the procurer.28. paragraph 5.16 then goes on to state:deviation from process defined in the guidelines5.16 in case there is any deviation from these guidelines, the same shall be with the prior approval of the appropriate commission. the appropriate commission shall decide on the modifications to the bid documents within a reasonable time not exceeding 90 days.29. a perusal of the cerc tariff adoption order in the present case dated 17.10.2007 makes it clear that the tariff is adopted by the commission only because the competitive bidding process which has been undertaken is in accordance with the guidelines so issued.30. all this would make it clear that even if a waiver is claimed of some of the provisions of the ppa, such waiver, if it affects tariffs that are ultimately payable by the consumer, would necessarily affect public interest and would have to pass muster of the commission under sections 61 to 63 of the electricity act. this is for the reason that what is adopted by the commission under section 63 is only a tariff obtained by competitive bidding in conformity with guidelines issued. if at any subsequent point of time such tariff is increased, which increase is outside the four corners of the ppa, even in cases covered by section 63, the legislative intent and the language of sections 61 and 62 make it clear that the commission alone can accept such amended tariff as it would impact consumer interest and therefore public interest.31. but on the facts of these cases, it is argued by learned counsel for sasan that in point of fact the tariff laid down in schedule 11 of the ppa has not been sought to be changed. all that has happened is that, as a result of cod being declared on 31.3.2013, the very tariff laid down in schedule 11 becomes applicable, but for year one being treated as one day and year two commencing from 1.4.2013. counsel for sasan may be right in saying this, but the substance of the matter is that a consumer would have to pay substantially more by way of tariff under the ppa if year one is gobbled up in one day, as year two's tariff is one paisa more than year one and year three's tariff is substantially more than year two. in short, instead of getting two years or part thereof exceeding one year at a substantially lower tariff, the consumer now gets only one year and one day at the lower tariff rates. this may also by itself not lead to the parties having to go to the commission as this is envisaged by the ppa. but it is clear that if a waiver is to be accepted on the facts of this case, it would clearly impact the public interest, in that consumers would have to pay substantially more for electricity consumed by them. this being the case, on facts it may not be necessary to go to the commission as had sasan in fact met the parameters of schedule 5 on 30th march, then as per schedule 11, year one would in fact have been only for one day. however, any waiver of the requirement of schedule 5 would definitely impact the generation of electricity at the mandated percentage of contracted capacity as also the amounts payable by consumers, and would therefore affect the public interest. this being the case, this is not a case covered by the judgments cited on behalf of sasan, in particular the judgment of this court in commissioner of customs, bombay v. virgo steels bombay manu/sc/0255/2002manu/sc/0255/2002 : (2002) 4 scc 316, in which it has been held that even the mandatory requirement of a statute can be waived by the party concerned, provided it is intended only for his benefit. this case would fall within the parameters of the other judgments referred to above, and would therefore be governed by judgments which state that any waiver of the requirements of article 6.3 and schedule 5 would ultimately impact consumer interest and therefore the public interest. such waiver therefore cannot be allowed to pass muster on the facts of the present case.32. since the result of this case also depends upon the correct reading of article 6 read with schedule 5 of the ppa, and whether there has been waiver in fact in the sense of being the intentional relinquishment of a known right by the procurers or on their behalf, it is necessary to advert to the scheme of article 6, the independent engineer's certificate, and various meetings, emails, and letters exchanged between the parties. article 6 deals with synchronization, commissioning, and commercial operations. in the first step to be taken by the seller, the unit producing electricity has to be synchronized to the grid system. it is only after synchronization takes place that the unit is to be commissioned. what is important is that at the commissioning stage, the parameters mentioned in schedule 5 are to be met. the most important parameter mentioned in schedule 5, when the performance test is to be taken for the purpose of commissioning, is that a unit shall be deemed to have passed such test only if it operates continuously for 72 consecutive hours at or about 95% of its contracted capacity as existing on the effective date and within the electrical system limits and functional specifications. further, as a part of the performance test, the seller must demonstrate that the unit meets functional specifications for ramping rate separately mentioned in schedule 4 of the ppa. it is only when such test is passed that a unit can be said to be commissioned under the ppa. this then is to be certified by the independent engineer jointly appointed by the parties under article 6.3.1, in the form of a final test certificate, which states that (a) the commission tests have been carried in accordance with schedule 5 and are acceptable to him, and (b) the result of the performance test shows that the unit's tested capacity is not less than 95% of the contracted demand as existing on the effective date.33. if the schedule 5 parameters are not met, it is incumbent on the independent engineer to then state reasons for the non-issuance of the final test certificate. once this is done, under article 6.3.2, the seller may retake the relevant test within a reasonable period after the end of the previous test so as to comply with the basic requirements of schedule 5. it is only after this that a unit can be said to be a "commissioned unit" as defined, which means that it is a unit in respect of which cod has occurred. cod or commercial operation date is also separately defined as meaning, in relation to a unit, the date one day after the date when each of the procurers receives a final test certificate of the independent engineer as per article 6.3.1. it is thus clear that the scheme of article 6 is that a unit cannot be said to have a commercial operation date unless and until it is first synchronized with the grid and commissioned after meeting the parameters mentioned in schedule 5 of the ppa.34. article 6.3.3 refers to performance tests of a unit during the period of the ppa. if under article 6.3.3 after cod has been achieved in a unit, an increased tested capacity over and above that provided in 6.3.1 (b) is achieved in a subsequent performance test, certain consequences follow. equally, if after cod has been obtained in a unit, and the most recent performance test mentioned during the working of the ppa has been conducted, and it is found that in such test a figure less than contracted capacity is achieved, the unit shall be de-rated with certain consequences which are mentioned in article 6.3.4 read with article 8.2.2. the scheme of article 6 therefore read as a whole appears to be that cod cannot be achieved until the parameters mentioned in schedule 5 are achieved and there is a final test certificate to that effect. the subsequent clauses, article 6.3.3 and article 6.3.4 only kick in after cod is obtained in a unit, leading to either increased capacity or to de-rated capacity with consequences which follow under the ppa.35. the meetings, emails, and letters between the parties have now to be examined. the first important meeting that is necessary for us to advert to is the meeting of 27.2.2013. the meeting was chaired by the managing director of the lead procurer i.e. m.p. power management company limited. it was attended by all the other procurers, and officials of sasan. what is emphasized on behalf of sasan is that the revised cod of the sasan units was accepted by all the procurers under article 4.5.1 of the ppa to be - (first unit) by 31.3.2013. the procurers asked sasan for the estimated date for synchronization and cod of the first unit. sasan indicated that synchronization is expected in the first week of march, 2013, and the cod before 31.3.2013. what is important about this meeting is that the procurers were no doubt interested in getting electricity from sasan as soon as possible, but obviously only in accordance with article 6.3.1 read with the 5th schedule. this would only mean that the meeting would disclose that the anxiety of the procurers to get electricity at cheap rates would be in accordance with the ppa and not against it. in other words, if a final test certificate had been given to the effect that 95% of contracted capacity could have been delivered by unit no. 3 on or before 31.3.2013, the procurers were anxious to avail of it, and not otherwise.36. it is unnecessary for us to burden this judgment with the emails that passed between sasan and wrldc between 27.3.2013 and 30.3.2013. it is enough for us to state that sasan contends that it was ready to deliver at 95% of the contracted demand but for wrldc, and wrldc states that sasan was never obstructed by wrldc, and in fact was not capable of delivering electricity at 95% of the contracted demand at the relevant time. wrldc appears to be correct in this for the simple reason that if we see the performance of sasan for the period 1st april to 16th august, 2013, it is clear that various tests were undertaken, but 95% of contract capacity for a continuous period of 72 hours had only been achieved in june even according to sasan.37. in any event, the performance test certificate issued on 30.3.2013 leaves much to be desired. since the commission has castigated this certificate and the appellate tribunal has absolved the independent engineer completely, it is necessary to set out this certificate in full.lahmeyer international (india) pvt. ltd.corporate office & correspondence address:intec house, 37 institutional area, sector 44, gurgaon-122002, national capital region (india)certificate of independent engineer (ie)test certificate of performance test for the commercial operation declaration of the first unit (unit-3 of 660 mw) of sasan ultra mega power project (6x660 mw)this certificate is issued by ie with reference to article 6.3.1 of ppa executed on 7th august 2007 between sasan power limited (spl, the seller) and the power procurers. based on the performance test witnessed by ie from 27th march 2013 to 30th march 2013 and review of the detailed performance test results provided by the seller, it is certified that:1. the unit was synchronized with the grid at 15.18 hrs on 27th march 2013 after receiving the permission of wrldc.2. the seller (spl) had submitted the power injection schedule to wrldc at 15.35 hours on 27th march 2013 for raising the load gradually to 100% of the contracted capacity of 620.4 mw(ex bus) by 2000 hrs. on 27th march 2013 for demonstrating continuous operation at that load for continuous 72 (seventy two) consecutive hours. however, wrldc, did not permit the seller to operate the unit beyond 100 mw (ex bus) till the morning of 28th march 2013 due to the following reasons:a) the demand in the grid was low due to the holiday on account of holi festival.b) all the units in the grid were operating at their technical minimum capacity.3. the seller was continuously keeping in touch with wrldc till 21.40 hours on 29th march 2013 for seeking permission to raise the load. at 22.19 hrs on 29th march 2013 wrldc permitted the seller to raise the load. accordingly, seller raised the load to around 150 mw (ex bus).4. at 07.13 hours on 30th march 2013, wrldc asked the seller to submit its revised power injection schedule for raising the load. at this point of time, the unit had already completed continuous operation of 50 (fifty) consecutive hours at a low load of about 100 mw (ex-bus) and another 9 (nine) consecutive hours immediately thereafter at 150 mw. seller informed wrldc at 14.18 hrs that it would increase the load from 20.00 hours to reach full load. as such, in line with wrldc instructions and grid conditions. seller maintained load of around 100 mw (ex bus) for around 50 hours and maintained load of around 150 mw (ex bus) for remaining 22 hours as per wrldc instructions and grid conditions.5. the commissioning test has been carried out in accordance with schedule 5 of ppa and the results of the performance test are acceptable to ie. the results of the performance test show that the unit's tested capacity is not less than 101.38 mw (ex bus), the maximum permitted load by wrldc for injection into the grid. during the above stated period of continuous 72 (seventy two) consecutive hours, the performance of the unit was found to conform to the electrical limits of the functional specifications in accordance with schedule 4 of ppa.the salient details of the performance test are as follows:(*) due to load restriction by wrldc.6. since the unit was operating below 50% of the rated load due to grid restriction, the unit could not be demonstrate the ramping rate above 50% of the rated load in accordance with schedule 4 of ppa. however, as per the certificate provided by original equipment manufacturer of boiler, turbine & generator, minimum ramp up and ramp down rate of 1% of contracted capacity per minute can be achieved.7. the unit could not be tested for the following parameters of supercritical technology at the steam turbine inlet as defined in ppa due to grid restriction.i) main steam pressure: 247 kg/cm2 (abs)ii) main steam temperature: 535 deg c.iii) reheat temperature: 565 deg c.however, the unit was found to operate with the following parameters at the steam turbine inlet during one hour operation from 1200 hrs to 1300 hrs on 29th march 2013.i) main steam pressure: 77.36 kg/cm2 (abs)ii) main steam temperature: 535.64 deg. c.iii) reheat temperature: 575.04 deg c.8. all the systems and equipment have been commissioned and are operational with two coal mills which were taken into service. the balance mills could not be taken into service due to the restrictions imposed by the grid. the furnace was found to operate stably even at a low load of 101.38 mw (ex-bus) and the parameters of turbine shaft vibrations, generator slot temperature and generator core temperature were found to be well within the equipment limits recommended by oem.9. in view of the above, the unit-3 is certified to have achieved commercial operation, with a tested capacity of 101.38 mw (ex bus) since:(a) commissioning test was carried out in accordance with article 6 and schedule 5 of the ppa.(b) results of the test show that unit-3 has met functional specifications stipulated in schedule 4 of the ppa.for lahmeyer international s(india)sd/-r.k. soniproject managerdated: 30th march 201338. it will be seen from this certificate that the tested capacity of the unit was found to be only 101.38 mw as against 95% of 620 mw i.e. 587 mw. it was also stated that since the unit was operating below 50% of the rated load due to grid restriction, the unit could not demonstrate ramping rate above 50% of rated load in accordance with the schedule 4 of the ppa.39. paragraph 9 of the certificate leaves much to be desired. obviously, if the tested capacity is 101.38 mw as against the required 95% i.e. 587 mw, the test could not have been carried out in accordance with article 6 read with schedule 5, and that despite the fact that ramping up and down could not be achieved, functional specifications stipulated in schedule 4 of the ppa were said to have been met. we are constrained, therefore, to agree with cerc which in its order dated 8.8.2014 has castigated this certificate. what article 6.3.1 requires is first and foremost a final test certificate of the independent engineer. the certificate dated 30.3.2013 given by the independent engineer is not a final test certificate. indeed, it is only in august that a final test certificate was given in accordance with article 6.3.1 of the ppa by the very same independent engineer. obviously the commissioning tests could not have been carried out in accordance with schedule 5, which requires in clause 1.1 (i) (d) that the seller shall perform, in respect of each unit, a performance test, by which such unit shall be deemed to have passed only if it operates continuously for 72 consecutive hours, at or above 95% of its contracted capacity as existing on the effective date. also, part of the same schedule requires that as a part of the performance test, the seller shall demonstrate that the unit meets the functional specifications for ramping rate as mentioned in schedule 4, which was again conspicuous by its absence. according to the independent engineer, "... the unit 3 is certified to have achieved commercial operation, with a tested capacity 101.38 mw" after carrying out the commissioning test in accordance with article 6 and schedule 5 of the ppa. in the certificate dated 30.3.2013 he has stated that on witnessing the performance test from 27.03.2013 to 30.03.2013, the tested capacity of the unit is 101.38 mw. however, it is clearly recorded that unit was operated beyond 100 mw only from the morning of 28.03.2013. in the chart on the performance test, the independent engineer has noted that 101.38 mw is operated only from 06.00 a.m. on 28.03.2013. under article 6 read with schedule 5 ... "unit shall be deemed to have passed if it operates continuously for 72 consecutive hours at or above 95% of its contracted capacity as existing on the effective date." even according to the independent engineer, 101.38 mw was injected only at 06.00 a.m. on 28.03.2013. such a tested capacity of 101.38 mw for 72 hours continuously could therefore have been certified only at 06.00 a.m. on 31.03.2013. if that be so, the commercial operation date would have been only one day after the date when the test certificate of the independent engineer has been received by the procurers. for this reason also, the test certificate is by no means in accordance with article 6.3.1 of the ppa read with schedule 5 thereof.40. it is now important to examine the correspondence between the parties in order to ascertain whether the appellate tribunal is correct in stating that waiver had in fact taken place. at this stage, it is important to advert to an email dated 31.3.2013 sent by the lead procurer to sasan. this email categorically states as follows:with reference to the letter no. geie 12086/12-13/001/rks dt. 30th march 2013 relating to the test certificate of the independent engineer towards the performance test for declaration of cod of unit-3 of 660 mw of umpp sasan project. it is to inform that as per clause 6.3.1 (a) and (b) of the ppa, commissioning test should have been carried out in accordance with schedule 5 of ppa and that the result of the test should not have been less than ninety five (95) percent of its contracted capacity. the test result is not as per the aforesaid clause and, therefore, is not acceptable to us. if the seller is agreeable to consider the performance test under clause 6.3.4 for a de-rated capacity of 101.38 mw, the same could be agreed by us.41. however, sasan relies heavily upon an email sent on 2.4.2013 by the lead procurer to sasan. this email reads as follows:tothe chief executive officerm/s. sasan power ltd.,dhirubhai ambani knowledge city,1 block, 2nd floor, north wing,thane, belapur road, koparkhairane,navi mumbai,maharashtra 400 710sub: independent engineer's letter dated 30th march 2013ref: independent engineer's letter dated 30th march 2013dear sir,please refer the independent engineer's letter dated 30th march 2013 pertaining to "test certificate of performance test for the commercial operation declaration of the first unit (unit-3 of 660 mw) of sasan ultra mega power project (6x660 mw)" and e-mail dated 31.3.2013 of 12.39 am sent by western region load despatch centre regarding scheduling of power from unit no. 3 of sasan umpp. as lead procurer, the performance test, as certified by the independent engineer for a capacity of 101.38 mw (ex-bus), is acceptable to us under clause 6.3.4 of the ppa. you may kindly go for performance test under notice to us for increasing the capacity beyond certification by the independent engineer in accordance with clause 6.3.3 of the ppa.as provided in article 6.3.4 of the ppa, in the period between this performance test and the next performance test, the unit's contracted capacity and available capacity would be considered as 101.38 mw (ex-bus) and its availability factor shall be calculated by reference to 101.38 mw. the charges payable for power shall be as laid down in article 6.3.4 of the ppa. in case the unit is in position to produce beyond 101.38 mw, the additional quantity would be scheduled in favour of the procurers under proviso to article 11.1 of the ppa, until the next performance test is conducted under article 6.3.3.thanking you,yours faithfully,sd/-executive director (ipc)42. the two emails read together would show that the lead procurer made it clear that declaration of cod of unit 3 is not accepted by them as the test was not performed as per article 6.3.1. however, in its anxiety to procure electricity, what was stated in the second email was that the capacity of 101.38 mw was acceptable only under article 6.3.4 of the ppa, meaning thereby that this ought to be treated as de-rated capacity, which should be paid for as provided. and any quantity produced over and above 101.38 mw would be treated as infirm power under article 11.1 proviso, and paid for as such.43. shri sibal argued that the moment article 6.3.4 of the ppa is attracted, this would necessarily mean that the appellants have waived the requirement of 95% of the contracted capacity as existing on the effective date mentioned in article 6.3.1(b). according to him, this would mean that scheduled power would have to be supplied, which in turn can only be done if there is waiver of the aforesaid requirement. it is difficult to agree. the case of the appellants has throughout been, starting from 12th april, 2013, onwards, that it has never consented to schedule 5 of the ppa and article 6.3.1(b) parameters being lowered. it is true that article 6.3.4 would not apply for the reason that it would come into effect only after the last recent performance test mentioned in article 6.3.3 has been conducted. and for article 6.3.3 to apply, a performance test must first indicate that from a unit's cod an increased tested capacity over and above that provided in article 6.3.1(b) must first occur. admittedly on facts this has not happened. what is important to note therefore is that the appellants desperately wanted power at a cheaper rate, and were willing to go to any extent to get such power, including invoking clause 6.3.4, which would not apply, and stating that anything over and above 101.38 mw ought to be treated as infirm power. it is clear under the regulations, however, that infirm power can never be supplied to the appellants themselves but can only be supplied to the grid. this being the case, the question that is still posed is whether the two emails read together would amount to a waiver of the right mentioned in clause 6.3.1. waiver is, as has been pointed out above, an intentional relinquishment of a known right. waiver must be spelled out with crystal clarity for there must be a clear intention to give up a known right. there is no such clear intention that can be spelled out on a reading of the two emails. all that can be spelled out is that the first email of 31.3.2013 categorically states that the test result is not as per article 6.3.1, and is not acceptable. the last sentence of this very email then refers to clause 6.3.4 and to a de-rated capacity of 101.38 mw. thereafter, the email of 2nd april, 2013 expands on the aforesaid last sentence of the earlier email by referring to article 6.3.4 and article 11 proviso. this is akin to a 'without prejudice' acceptance of de-rated power, being a non-acceptance of the test certificate dated 30.3.2013 coupled with a desperate attempt to somehow get whatever power is available. but this does not amount to a clear and unequivocal intention to relinquish a known right.44. it is not necessary to burden this judgment with various other acceptance emails of the other discoms inasmuch as they are all in terms of the email sent by the lead procurer. haryana discom has sent an email dated 12.4.2013 in which, even while accepting derated power, it has accepted the same without prejudice to its rights.45. in contrast to the aforesaid emails, the acceptance emails of bypl and brpl, both reliance group companies, may now be quoted:dear sirfrom sasan umpp delhi has allocation of 450 mw as per mop out of which brpl share is 43.58 out of delhi allocation. we accept the cod of 1st unit of 660 mw as declared by spl. may please schedule full quantum of brpl with immediate effect and confirm.regards.sanjay srivastav.assistant vp brpl. 9312147045sanjay srivastav (as v.p.)46. this acceptance email is in stark contrast with the acceptance email of the lead procurer, in that it unequivocally accepts cod of the first unit of 660 mw as declared by sasan. it is therefore clear that on facts in this case there is no waiver and the appellate tribunal in coming to an opposite conclusion, is clearly erroneous.47. interestingly enough, the appellate tribunal, in the impugned judgment dated 31.3.2016, contradicts itself when it states in one portion as follows:e) we have carefully gone through the ratio of the law laid down by hon'ble supreme court in waman shriniwas and in krishan lal's case, wherein in the latter case the hon'ble supreme court cited an illustration in paragraph 21 thereof. the words of the hon'ble supreme court are "to illustrate this principle, it has been stated that if the statutory condition be imposed simply for the security or the benefit of the parties to the action themselves, such condition will not be considered as indispensable and either party may waive it." in the present case, the requirement of achieving 95% of the contracted capacity for declaration of cod was not one for the private benefit of the seller and procurers. the said requirement and the appointment of an independent expert to oversee the commissioning process was built into the statutory contract i.e. ppa itself for a specific purpose, as a requirement of general policy, to ensure that generators do not declare their units to be commercially available without even demonstrating the capability of such units to achieve at least 95% of the contracted capacity.and then goes on to state:we further find that in the present case, there is no question of any public interest or public policy or morals or statutory regulations being violated. the wrldc, who was a petitioner before the central commission, in its petition clearly and equivocally states that there are no guidelines in respect of declaration of cod of the generators who are not governed by cerf (tariff regulations) 2009 and in the petition, wrldc prays to the central commission for issuing regulations and guidelines in that behalf.48. we thus find that the appellate tribunal is wholly incorrect in accepting the case of waiver put forward by learned counsel for sasan, and is equally incorrect in absolving the independent engineer for the test certificate given by him on 30.3.2013. we, therefore, set aside the appellate tribunal's judgment, and reinstate the judgment dated 8.8.2014 of the central electricity regulatory commission.49. shri sibal's last argument is that there is no substantial question of law so as to attract section 125 of the electricity act, 2003 in these appeals. we are afraid that we cannot agree. one substantial question of law is whether, when public interest is involved, waiver can at all take place of a right in favour of the generator of electricity under a ppa if the right also has an impact on consumer interest. this substantial question of law has been answered by us in the course of the judgment. we have also pointed out that the appellate tribunal's finding that the independent engineer's test certificate can pass muster and that there is a waiver on facts is not a possible conclusion, and such finding is, therefore, perverse and hence set aside. that apart, we have also pointed out the contradictory nature of the judgment of the appellate tribunal, when it points out that the requirement of article 6.3.1 is not merely for the private benefit of the procurers of electricity, but is as a matter of general policy; and then later on in the judgment finds that no question of public interest or public policy arises in the present case. in these circumstances, this plea must also be turned down. in the result, the appeals are allowed but with no order as to costs.
prafulla c. pant, j.1. this appeal is directed against order dated 07.11.2014, passed by the high court of judicature at madras, bench madurai, in civil revision petition (pd) (md) no. 1787 of 2008 whereby the revision was allowed, and order dated 12.03.2008 passed by subordinate judge, virudhunagar, on la. no. 3 of 2008 (in a.s. no. 55 of 2007), is set aside.2. we have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the papers on record.3. succinctly stated, facts of this case are that the appellant/plaintiff instituted original suit no. 92 of 2003 before district munsif, virudhunagar, for permanent injunction restraining the defendant from interfering in his peaceful possession and enjoyment of the property in suit. it is pleaded in the plaint that originally the property in dispute was owned by one gopalsamy pillai. on 21.08.1963 gopalsamy pillai transferred the property by executing a sale deed in favour of one lakshmiammal. lakshmiammal further transferred the property to gurusamy naicker through deed dated 26.12.1968. plaintiffs father ayyappan chettiar purchased the property from gurusamy naicker, and constructed his house. it is further pleaded that ayyappan chettiar executed will dated 13.12.1990 in favour of the plaintiff, and after death of his father in 1997, the plaintiff is in exclusive possession of the property. alleging that the defendant has no right over the disputed property, relief of permanent injunction against him is sought in the suit. plaintiff andisamy chettiar and defendant subburaj chettiar are sons of ayyappan chettiar.4. the defendant filed his written statement and contested the suit. it is not disputed in the written statement that ayyappan chettiar, who purchased the property from gurusamy naicker, died on 12.10.1997. however, it is disputed that ayyappan chettiar executed will dated 13.12.1990, relied by the plaintiff. it is alleged by the defendant that the plaintiff has filed suit for permanent injunction only to evade partition of the property. it is also pleaded by the defendant that apart from two sons, ayyappan chettiar had three daughters, namely, lakshmi, avudaithai and andal. lakshmi and andal died intestate leaving legal heirs, as such, suit is bad for non-joinder of remaining daughter of ayyappan chettiar and legal heirs of pre-deceased daughters.5. on the basis of pleadings of the parties following issues were framed by the trial court:(i) whether ayyappan chettiar executed a will in favour of the plaintiff in respect of the property in suit?(ii) whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief of permanent injunction?(iii) to what other relief, if any, the plaintiff is entitled?6. the plaintiff got examined himself as pw-1 andisamy chettiar and he also got examined pw-2 selvarajan, stated to be attesting witness of the will. nine documents (including will ex. a-4) were filed by the plaintiff. on behalf of the defendant, he got himself examined as dw-1 subburaj chettiar, and filed three documents. the trial court, after hearing the parties, decided issue no. 1 against the plaintiff holding that the plaintiff failed to prove that ayyappan chettiar executed the will relied on by him. on the basis of finding on issue no. 1, issue nos. 2 and 3 are also decided in favour of the defendant, and the suit was dismissed vide judgment and order dated 05.02.2007.7. aggrieved by the decree passed by the trial court, the plaintiff filed appeal (a.s. no. 55 of 2007) before the first appellate court, i.e. subordinate judge, virudhunagar.8. during the pendency of a.s. no. 55 of 2007 before the first appellate court, an application (i.a. no. 3 of 2008) was moved on behalf of the plaintiff with following prayer:therefore it is just and necessary that this hon'ble court be graciously pleased to direct a scientific investigation to find out whether the signature of ayyappan chettiar, my father in ex. a-4 is genuine by comparing the signature of ayyappan chettiar, in ex. a-4 with his admitted signatures in ex. b-1 to b-3, by a competent hand-writing expert, and further direct him to file a report to the scientific investigation done by him and justice thus rendered.9. the first appellate court, vide order dated 12.03.2008, allowed the la. no. 3 of 2008, and directed the appellant to deposit a sum of rs. 5000/- as fee.10. the defendant challenged the order passed by the first appellate court, allowing the application for additional evidence, before the high court in civil revision petition (pd) (md) no. 1787 of 2008, which is allowed by said court by the impugned order assailed before us.11. under the scheme of code of civil procedure, 1908 (for short "the code") whether oral or documentary, it is the trial court before whom parties are required to adduce their evidence. but in three exceptional circumstances additional evidence can be adduced before the appellate court, as provided under section 107(1)(d) read with rule 27 of order xli of the code. rule 27 of order xli reads as under:27. production of additional evidence in appellate court.-(1) the parties to an appeal shall not be entitled to produce additional evidence, whether oral or documentary, in the appellate court. but if-(a) the court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has refused to admit evidence which ought to have been admitted, or(aa) the party seeking to produce additional evidence, establishes that notwithstanding the exercise of due diligence, such evidence was not within his knowledge or could not, after the exercise of due diligence, be produced by him at the time when the decree appealed against was passed, or(b) the appellate court requires any document to be produced or any witness to be examined to enable it to pronounce judgment, or for any other substantial cause,the appellate court may allow such evidence or document to be produced, or witness to be examined.(2) wherever additional evidence is allowed to be produced by an appellate court, the court shall record the reason for its admission.(emphasis supplied)12. from the opening words of sub-rule (1) of rule 27, quoted above, it is clear that the parties are not entitled to produce additional evidence whether oral or documentary in the appellate court, but for the three situations mentioned above. the parties are not allowed to fill the lacunae at the appellate stage. it is against the spirit of the code to allow a party to adduce additional evidence without fulfillment of either of the three conditions mentioned in rule 27. in the case at hand, no application was moved before the trial court seeking scientific examination of the document (ex. a-4), nor can it be said that the plaintiff with due diligence could not have moved such an application to get proved the documents relied upon by him. now it is to be seen whether the third condition, i.e. one contained in clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of rule 27 is fulfilled or not.13. in k.r. mohan reddy v. net work inc. manu/sc/7978/2007manu/sc/7978/2007 : (2007) 14 scc 257, this court has held as under:19. the appellate court should not pass an order so as to patch up the weakness of the evidence of the unsuccessful party before the trial court, but it will be different if the court itself requires the evidence to do justice between the parties. the ability to pronounce judgment is to be understood as the ability to pronounce judgment satisfactorily to the mind of the court. but mere difficulty is not sufficient to issue such direction....14. in north eastern railway admn. v. bhagwan das manu/sc/7481/2008manu/sc/7481/2008 : (2008) 8 scc 511, this court observed thus:13. though the general rule is that ordinarily the appellate court should not travel outside the record of the lower court and additional evidence, whether oral or documentary is not admitted but section 107 code of civil procedure, which carves out an exception to the general rule, enables an appellate court to take additional evidence or to require such evidence to be taken subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed. these conditions are prescribed under order 41 rule 27 code of civil procedure. nevertheless, the additional evidence can be admitted only when the circumstances as stipulated in the said rule are found to exist....15. in n. kamalam (dead) and anr. v. ayyasamy and anr. manu/sc/0422/2001manu/sc/0422/2001 : (2001) 7 scc 503, this court, interpreting rule 27 of order xli of the code, has observed in para 19 as under:...the provisions of order 41 rule 27 have not been engrafted in the code so as to patch up the weak points in the case and to fill up the omission in the court of appeal-it does not authorize any lacunae or gaps in the evidence to be filled up. the authority and jurisdiction as conferred on to the appellate court to let in fresh evidence is restricted to the purpose of pronouncement of judgment in a particular way.16. in union of india v. ibrahim uddin and anr. manu/sc/0561/2012manu/sc/0561/2012 : (2012) 8 scc 148, this court has held as under:49. an application under order 41 rule 27 code of civil procedure is to be considered at the time of hearing of appeal on merits so as to find out whether the documents and/or the evidence sought to be adduced have any relevance/bearing on the issues involved. the admissibility of additional evidence does not depend upon the relevancy to the issue on hand, or on the fact, whether the applicant had an opportunity for adducing such evidence at an earlier stage or not, but it depends upon whether or not the appellate court requires the evidence sought to be adduced to enable it to pronounce judgment or for any other substantial cause. the true test, therefore is, whether the appellate court is able to pronounce judgment on the materials before it without taking into consideration the additional evidence sought to be adduced....17. learned counsel for the appellant argued before us that the high court, in revision, at an interim stage of appeal pending before the lower appellate court, should not have interfered in the matter of requirement of additional evidence.18. we have considered the argument advanced on behalf of the appellant and also perused the law laid down by this court as to the exercise of revisional power under section 115 of the code in such matters. in mahavir singh and ors. v. naresh chandra and anr. manu/sc/0674/2000manu/sc/0674/2000 : (2001) 1 scc 309, explaining the scope of revision in the matters of acceptance of additional evidence by the lower appellate court interpreting expression "or for any other substantial cause" in rule 27 of order xli, this court has held as under:the words "or for any other substantial cause" must be read with the word "requires", which is set out at the commencement of the provision, so that it is only where, for any other substantial cause, the appellate court requires additional evidence, that this rule would apply as noticed by the privy council in kessowji issur v. g.i.p. rly. [manu/mh/0072/1907manu/mh/0072/1907 : ilr (1907-08) 31 bom 381]. it is under these circumstances such a power could be exercised. therefore, when the first appellate court did not find the necessity to allow the application, we fail to understand as to how the high court could, in exercise of its power under section 115 code of civil procedure, have interfered with such an order, particularly when the whole appeal is not before the court. it is only in the circumstances when the appellate court requires such evidence to pronounce the judgment the necessity to adduce additional evidence would arise and not in any other circumstances. when the first appellate court passed the order on the application filed under order 41 rule 27 code of civil procedure, the whole appeal was before it and if the first appellate court is satisfied that additional evidence was not required, we fail to understand as to how the high court could interfere with such an order under section 115 code of civil procedure.19. in gurdev singh and ors. v. mehnga ram and anr. manu/sc/0887/1997manu/sc/0887/1997 : (1997) 6 scc 507, this court, on similar issue, has expressed the view as under:we have heard learned counsel for the parties. the grievance of the appellants before us is that in an appeal filed by them before the learned additional district judge, ferozepur, in an application under order xli, rule 27(b), code of civil procedure (code of civil procedure) the learned additional district judge at the final hearing of the appeal wrongly felt that additional evidence was required to be produced as requested by the appellants by way of examination of a handwriting expert. the high court in the impugned order exercising jurisdiction under section 115 code of civil procedure took the view that the order of the appellate court could not be sustained. in our view the approach of the high court in revision at that interim stage when the appeal was pending for final hearing before the learned additional district judge was not justified and the high court should not have interfered with the order which was within the jurisdiction of the appellate court. the reason is obvious. the appellate court hearing the matter finally could exercise jurisdiction one way or the other under order xli, rule 27 specially clause (b). if the order was wrong on merits, it would always be open for the respondent to challenge the same in accordance with law if an occasion arises to carry the matter in second appeal after an appellate decree is passed. but at this interim stage, the high court should not have felt itself convinced that the order was without jurisdiction. only on this short question, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the controversy involved and on the legality of the contentions advanced by both the learned counsel for the parties regarding additional evidence, we allow this appeal, set aside the order of the high court.20. in view of the law laid down by this court, as discussed above, regarding exercise of revisional powers in the matter of allowing the application for additional evidence, when appeal is pending before the lower appellate court, the impugned order passed by the high court cannot be upheld and the same is set aside. however, to do complete justice between the parties, we think it just and proper to direct the first appellate court to decide the application for additional evidence afresh in the light of observations made by this court regarding principles on which such an application can be allowed or rejected. we order accordingly. we further clarify that we have not expressed any opinion as to the merits of the case. accordingly, the appeal is disposed of. no order as to costs.
n. santosh hegde, j.1. m/s. associated cement company ltd. (for short 'acc') had embarked upon a project of substantial expansion and modernisation of its cement factory at shahabad in karnataka. the acc had floated a tender inviting supply of high standard deformed steel bars. in that tender, acc had claimed that the project was aided by the international bank for reconstruction and development (for short 'the ibrd'), which would give the importer exemption from the import duty. in response to the said tender, m/s. virgo steels made an offer to supply 5,187 mt of steel. the offer was accepted by the acc and the said virgo steels obtained an advance licence under the deemed export scheme for duty-free import of the concerned steel under notification no. 210/82. this notification specifically required that if the goods in question was not used for the purpose for which importation was permitted then the importer was liable on demand to pay a sum equivalent to the duty leviable. sometime in november, 1988, the acc decided to abandon the work of expansion, hence, the licence obtained under the above said scheme for importation of duty-free steel became invalid. in spite of the same m/s. virgo steels imported certain quantities of steel duty-free knowing very well that the expansion project by the acc had been abandoned. it is on record that m/s. virgo steels asked acc to issue a signed export certificate in regard to actual quantities of steel supplied by it for the purpose of duty exemption, but the acc pleaded their inability to provide such deemed export certificate in view of the fact that it had abandoned its project.2. in the above factual background and on the basis of certain information received by the marine preventive wing of bombay, customs investigations were conducted in regard to the import and illegal sale of steel by m/s. virgo steels. based on the said investigation, commissioner of customs, bombay came to the conclusion that the import made by m/s. virgo steels after the abandonment of the project by the acc was in contravention of the provisions of the customs act, 1962 ('the act'), hence, decided to initiate proceedings against m/s. virgo steels and acc. having come to know of this decision of the commissioner of customs, to pre-empt any penal proceedings, consequences of which could have been very serious, m/s. virgo steels wrote a letter dated 30.3.1991 to the assistant collector of customs marine preventive wing, bombay admitting in clear terms that the import of 24,326 mt of billets and 2300 mt of lead ingot by them, and cleared duty-free under the dec scheme was illegal. they also admitted that the said material was sold in the market contrary to the terms of said import scheme and assured the former that they were ready to pay the duty chargeable under the said import as also any other penalty that may be imposed on them. the relevant part of the said letter is as under:- "in this respect it is our humble submission that we are ready to pay the duty chargeable of 24,326 mt of billets and 2300 mt of lead ingot along with any other penalty imposed on us. we do not want any show cause notice and personal hearing in the matter." (emphasis supplied). along with the said letter they also enclosed a cheque for a sum of rs. 50 lacs though post dated as a token of their commitment made in the said letter.3. based on the said letter, the collector of customs vide his order dated 16.3.1993 held that duty amounting to rs. 1,50,11,858/- was leviable on the goods cleared by m/s. virgo steels and after giving deductions for such amounts already deposited by them, a demand for the balance sum of rs. 72,02,060/- was made on m/s. virgo steels along with a penalty of rs. 5 lacs. in regard to acc, the collector imposed a penalty of rs. 5 lacs for having abetted the illegal import of the said sale.4. m/s. virgo steels and acc preferred their respective appeals before the customs, excise & gold (control) appellate tribunal (for short 'the tribunal'). the tribunal by the impugned order though rejected the contention of m/s. virgo steels as to the genuineness of the imports, still allowed their appeal holding that the non issuance of show cause notice as required under section 28 of the act had vitiated the proceedings initiated by the collector of customs, hence, partially allowed their appeal. the appeal of the acc was also allowed holding that there was no intentional or otherwise abetment by acc because they had already informed m/s. virgo steels of their decision to abandon their expansion project and had also refused to give m/s. virgo steels a certificate justifying to import made by them.5. it is against this order of the tribunal made in appeal no. c-1994/92-b2 of m/s. virgo steels and appeal no. c/151/94.bom. filed by the acc, the above noted four appeals have been preferred before this court, out of which revenue has filed two appeals out of which c.a. no. 3711 of 2000 is against the order of the tribunal allowing the appeals filed by m/s. virgo steels, in part, and c.a. no. 3712 of 2000 is against the order of the tribunal, allowing the appeal of acc in its entirety, while m/s. virgo steels being aggrieved by that part of the order which has gone against has preferred c.a. nos. 48-49 of 2001.6. learned solicitor general appearing for the revenue, contended before us that the tribunal has erred in coming to the conclusion that the principle of waiver did not apply to the requirement of notice under section 28 of the act. he submitted that by the letter of 30.3.1991, the managing partner of m/s. virgo steels had in specific terms admitted the violation of conditions of the licence granted to it under the deemed export scheme as also the firm's liability to pay duty and penalty. he further submitted that the firm having expressly waived its right to receive a show-cause notice as also personal hearing, it cannot be permitted to turn around and say that non-issuance of notice under section 28 of the act is fatal to the revenue. mr. rajiv dutta, learned senior counsel appearing for m/s. virgo steels, while defending the order of the tribunal, submitted that a notice under section 28 of the act being a condition precedent to invoke the jurisdiction of the officer concerned, in the absence of such notice proceedings initiated for the recovery of duty became void. he also submitted that the principle of waiver does not apply to a mandatory requirement of law. he further contended that the letter of 30.3.1991 was obtained by the customs authorities under coercion and duress, therefore, there could be no waiver based on such letter. he further assailed the finding of the tribunal that the import made by m/s. virgo steels not for the purpose of a project aided by the ibrd.7. we will first consider the argument of learned counsel for m/s. virgo steels that their letter of 30.3.1991 was written by the firm because of coercion and duress, hence, cannot be relied upon. this argument was raised for the first time before the collector during the course of arguments of learned counsel appearing for m/s. virgo steels in the adjudicatory proceedings. it is to be seen that the said letter is dated 30.3.1991 and the argument of learned counsel was addressed on 3.12.1992 -- i.e. more than one and a half years after the said letter was sent to the collector concerned. during that period of over one and a half years, the partner of the company who had signed the letter or anybody else on behalf of the firm, made no attempt to resile from the contents of the said letter. they have neither made any complaint nor taken any steps to get over the contents of the letter written on behalf of the firm on 30.3.1991. it is relevant to note at this stage that along with the letter, a post-dated cheque was sent and no steps were taken to stop payment against that cheque either. before the collector, though an oral submission was made by learned counsel that the letter in question was obtained by coercion not even an affidavit was filed in support of that allegation. the collector by his order, had rejected the said contention holding that at no stage till the final submission of reply on 3.12.1992, m/s. virgo steels had made any grievance of coercion or any other undue influence in obtaining the letter of 30.3.1991. it is also necessary to note herein that this argument of coercion in obtaining the letter of 3.12.1992 seems not to have been pressed before the tribunal. the tribunal in its impugned order in paras 8 and 9 has extracted the argument of learned counsel for m/s. virgo steels where we find no reference whatsoever as to the non-voluntary nature of the letter of 30.3.1991. for all these reasons, we have no hesitation in rejecting this contention of m/s. virgo steels that the letter of 30.3.1991 was not voluntarily submitted by them. this argument before us, in our opinion, is totally baseless and an afterthought.8. we will next consider the requirement of section 28 of the act and the applicability of the principle of waiver to the said requirement of that section. while so doing, it is to be noted that our discussion of section 28 of the act is with reference to the section as it stood at the relevant time and not with reference to the existing section 28 of the act. the tribunal by the impugned order has held that in the absence of a notice under section 28 of the act, the recovery of duty which has escaped collection, is impermissible in law. while accepting this argument, the tribunal has placed reliance on a judgment of this court in collector of customs, calcutta v. tin plate co. of india ltd. manu/sc/1584/1997manu/sc/1584/1997 : 1996(87)elt589(sc) . it is true that in the course of the above-cited judgment, this court had held that a notice under section 28 is a condition precedent, but having perused the said judgment carefully, we are of the opinion that this court used the expression "condition precedent" with reference to issuance of notice under section 28 and not with reference to the jurisdiction of the proper officer under that section. while the absence of notice may invalidate the procedure adopted by the proper officer under the act, it will not take away the jurisdiction of the officer to initiate action for the purpose of recovery of duty escaped. this is because of the fact that the proper officer does not derive his power to initiate proceedings for recovery of escaped duty from section 28 of the act. such power is conferred on him by other provisions of the act which mandate the proper officer to collect the duty leviable. by a perusal of chapter v of the act in which section 28 is found, it is seen that the charging section which authorises the levy of customs duty is found in section 12 of the act. section 17 contemplates the procedure for making an assessment in regard to duty payable while sub-section (4) of section 17 makes a provision to empower the proper officer to reassess the imported goods for duty if it is found that the assessment made at the time of importation was based on incorrect or false information. section 142 of the act found in chapter xviii provides for actual recovery of sums due to the government. a cumulative reading of these provisions found in the act clearly shows that the jurisdiction of a proper officer to initiate proceedings for recovery of duty which has escaped collection, is not traceable to section 28. the power to recover duty which has escaped collection is a concomitant power arising out of the levy of customs duty under section 12 of the act, and the same does not emanate from section 28 of the act. in our opinion, section 28 only provides, for the procedural aspect for recovery of duty, hence, any irregularity committed by a proper officer in following the procedure laid down in section 28 would not denude that officer of his jurisdiction to initiate action for recovery of escaped duty but it may make such proceedings initiated by that officer voidable. in that view of the matter, in our opinion, the term "condition precedent" used in the case of tin plate co. (supra) is referable to the procedural requirement of section 28 and not to the jurisdictional aspect of the proper officer to recover the escaped duty. in the said view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the law laid down by this court in tin plate co.'s case (supra) is that issuance of a notice under section 28 is a mandatory requirement of that section, with which we are in agreement. we also notice the very important fact that in that case the question of waiver did not arise and what was considered by this court was the contention of the revenue that a subsequent letter written by the revenue after the expiry of the period of limitation would cure the defect of non-issuance of a notice.9. the next question for our consideration is: can a mandatory requirement of a statute be waived by the party concerned? in answering this question, we are aided by a catena of judgments of this court as well as of the privy council. we will first refer to the judgment of the privy council which has been consistently followed by the supreme court in a number of subsequent cases involving similar points. in vellayan chettiar v. government of province of madras (air 1947 pc 197), the privy council held that even though section 80 c.p.c. is mandatory, still non-issuance of such notice would not render the suit bad in the eye of law because such non-issuance of notice can be waived by the party concerned. in the said judgment, the privy council held that the protection provided under section 80 is a protection given to the person concerned and if in a particular case that person does not require the protection he can lawfully waive his right.10. in the case of dhirendra nath gorai and subal chandra shaw and ors. v. sudhir chandra ghosh and ors. manu/sc/0018/1964manu/sc/0018/1964 : [1964]6scr1001 , this court followed the judgment of the privy council in vellayan chettiar (supra) and held that even though the requirement of section 35 of the bengal money lenders' act is mandatory in nature, such mandatory requirement could be waived by the party concerned. on a true construction of section 35 of that act, this court held that the said section is intended only for the benefit of the judgment-debtor and, therefore, he can waive the right conferred on him under the said section.11. in the case of s. raghbir singh gill v. s. gurcharansingh tohra and ors. manu/sc/0290/1980manu/sc/0290/1980 : [1980]3scr1302 , this court negatived an argument that the requirement of section 94 of the representation of the people act, 1951 cannot be waived. this argument was based on the principle that public policy cannot be waived. rejecting the said argument, this court held that the privilege conferred or a right created by a statute, if it is solely for the benefit of an individual, he can waive it. it also held that where a prohibition enacted is founded on public policy, courts should be slow to apply the doctrine of waiver but if such privilege granted under the act is for the sole benefit of an individual as is the case under section 94 of the representation of the people act, the person in whose benefit the privilege was enacted has a right to waive it because the very concept of privilege inheres a right to waiver.12. in krishan lal v. state of j & k manu/sc/0728/1994manu/sc/0728/1994 : (1995)iillj718sc , this court while considering the requirement of furnishing copy of inquiry proceedings under section 17(5) of the j & k (government servants) prevention of corruption act, 1962 held following the judgment in v. chettiar's case (supra) and d.n. gorai (supra) that though the requirement mentioned in section 17(5) of the act was mandatory, the same can be waived because the requirement of giving a copy of the proceedings of the inquiry mandated by section 17(5) of the act is one which is for the benefit of the individual concerned.13. in martin & harris ltd. v. 6th additional distt. judge andors. manu/sc/0901/1998manu/sc/0901/1998 : air1998sc492 , this court while considering the provision of section 12(1)(a) first proviso of the u.p. urban buildings (regulation of letting, rent and eviction) act, 1972 negatived a contention advanced on behalf of the appellant there in that the said provision was for public benefit and could not be waived. it held that it is true that such benefit enacted under the said proviso covered a class of tenants, still the said protection would be available to a tenant only as an individual, hence, it gave the tenant concerned a locus poenitentiae to avail the benefit or not. it also held that the benefit given under the said section was purely personal to the tenant concerned, hence, such a statutory benefit though mandatory, can be waived by the person concerned.14. from the ratio laid down by the privy council and followed by this court in the above-cited judgments, it is clear that even though a provision of law is mandatory in its operation if such provision is one which deals with the individual rights of person concerned and is for his benefit, the said person can always waive such a right.15. bearing a mind the above decided principle in law, if we consider the mandatory requirement of issuance of notice under section 28 of the act, it will be seen that that requirement is provided by the statute solely for the benefit of the individual concerned, therefore, he can waive that right. in other words, this section casts a duty on the officer to issue notice to the person concerned of the proposed action to be taken. this is not in the nature of a public notice nor any person other than the person against whom the proceedings are initiated has any right for such a notice. thus, this right of notice being personal to the person concerned, the same can be waived by that person.16. if the above position in law is correct, which we think it is, m/s. virgo steels, having specifically waived its right for a notice, cannot now be permitted to turn around and contend that the proceedings initiated against them are void for want of notice under section 28 of the act, so as to frustrate the statutory duty of the revenue to demand and collect customs duty which m/s. virgo steels had intentionally evaded.17. since the sole ground on which the appeal of m/s. virgo steels was allowed by the tribunal is based on non-issuance of a notice under section 28 and we having found such a notice was not necessary in the facts and circumstances of the case, the appeal of the revenue as against m/s. virgo steels has to be allowed.18. in c.a. nos. 48-49 of 2001, m/s. virgo steels have, inter alia, questioned the correctness of the findings of the tribunal as to the illegality of the import of steel made by them, the tribunal after considering the material on record by the impugned order, has agreed with the finding of the collector that m/s. virgo steels had imported the steel in question, duty- free representing that the same was being imported for utilisation in a project financed by the ibrd but was in fact sold in the open market. this finding being one of facts and having been arrived at by the collector and the tribunal on the basis of the material on record, we are not inclined to disturb this finding, nor, indeed, do we find any good ground to do so. hence, we find no merit in these appeals and these appeals fail.19. c.a. no. 3712 of 2000 is filed by the revenue against the order of the tribunal which has allowed the appeal filed by acc holding that there was no material to come to the conclusion that acc had abetted the illegal import of steel by m/s. virgo steels. this finding also being a finding on a question of fact, we are not inclined to interfere with this finding. at this stage we must place on record the fact that learned solicitor general has very fairly conceded that he is not in a position to persuade us to take a contra view in this appeal, therefore, this appeal also fails.20. for the reasons stated above, c.a. no. 3711 of 2000 is allowed, the impugned order of the tribunal is set aside and that of the collector restored. the appellant shall be entitled to costs payable by m/s. virgo steels, mumbai.21. c.a. no. 3712 of 2000 is dismissed. no costs.22. c.a. nos. 48-49 of 2001 are dismissed with costs.
patnaik, c.j.1. leave granted in slp (sic) nos. 12040, 12369 and 13159 of 2002.2. the question that arises in this batch of appeals is whether the insurer is liable to pay compensation to the dependants of the deceased passenger, while the deceased passenger was travelling in a goods vehicle and that vehicle met with an accident, on account of which the passenger died or suffered bodily injury. originally, when the bunch of appeals was being heard, a bench of this court by order dated 27th march, 2001, came to the conclusion that all the appeals fall in three categories - category (i) being those cases which are covered by the provisions of motor vehicles act, 1939; category (ii) are the cases which are covered by the motor vehicles act, 1988, prior to the amendment of 1994; category (iii) are those cases which fall after the amendment of 1994. when the matters were finally heard, a bench delivered judgment in respect of cases under category (i) and (iii) above on 17th august, 2001. but so far as cases falling under category (ii) namely which are covered under the motor vehicles act, 1988, prior to its amendment in 1994, it was felt that the decision of the court in satpal singh's case, manu/sc/0751/1999manu/sc/0751/1999 : air2000sc235 : air2000sc235 , requires reconsideration by a larger bench and that is how this bunch of appeals had been placed before a three judge bench. this, in turn, necessitates interpretation of the provisions of section 147 of the motor vehicles act, 1988 (herein after referred to as 'the act') as it stood prior to its amendment in 1994. it may be stated that the provisions of section 147 of the act correspond to section 95 of the motor vehicles act, 1939.3. before considering the rival submissions, it would be appropriate to notice the provisions of section 95 of the motor vehicles act, 1939, section 147 of the act as it stood prior to its amendment of 1994 and the provision as it stands now after the amendment of 1994.4. section 95 of the motor vehicles act, 1939 reads as under:95. requirements of policies and limits of liability.-(1) in order to comply with the requirements of this chapter, a policy of insurance must be a policy which-(a) is issued by a person who is an authorized insurer or by a co-operative society allowed under section 108 to transact the business of an insurer, and(b) insures the person or classes of persons specified in the policy to the extent specified in the policy to the extent specified in sub-section (2)-(i) against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of the death of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place;(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of a public service vehicle caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place:provided that a policy shall not be required-(i) to cover liability in respect of the death, arising out of and in the course of his employment, of the employee of a person insured by the policy or in respect of bodily injury sustained by such an employee arising out of and in the course of his employment other than a liability arising under the workmen's compensation act, 1923 (8 of 1923), in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, any such employee-(a) engaged in driving the vehicle, or(b) if it is a public service vehicle, engaged as a conductor of the vehicle or in examining tickets on the vehicle, or(c) if it is a goods vehicle, being carried in the vehicle, or(ii) except where the vehicle is a vehicle in which passengers are carried for hire or reward or by reason of or in pursuance of a contract of employment, to cover liability in respect of the death of or bodily injury to persons being carried in or upon or entering or mounting or alighting from the vehicle at the time of the occurrence of the event out of which a claim arises, or(iii) to cover any contractual liability.explanation- for the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the death of or bodily injury to any person or damages to any property of a third party shall be deemed to have been caused by or to have arisen out of, the use of a vehicle in a public place notwithstanding that the person who is dead or injured or the property which is damaged was not in a public place at the time of the accident, if the act or omission which left to the accident occurred in a public place.(2) subject to the proviso to sub-section (1), a policy of insurance shall cover any liability incurred in respect of any one accident up to the following limits, namely-(a) where the vehicle is a goods vehicle, a limit of fifty thousand rupees in all, including the liabilities, if any, arising under the workmen's compensation act, 1923 (8 of 1923), in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, employees (other than the driver), not exceeding six in number, being carried in the vehicle;(b) where the vehicle is a vehicle in which passengers are carried for hire or reward or by reason of or in pursuance of a contract of employment,-(i) in respect of persons other than passengers carried for hire or reward, a limit of fifty thousand rupees in all;(ii) in respect of passengers,-(1) a limit of fifty thousand rupees in all where the vehicle is registered to carry not more than thirty passengers;(2) a limit of seventy-five thousand rupees in all where the vehicle is registered to carry more than thirty but not more than sixty passengers;(3) a limit of one lakh rupees in all where the vehicle is registered to carry more than sixty passengers; and(4) subject to the limits aforesaid, ten thousand rupees for each individual passenger where the vehicle is a motor cab, and five thousand rupees for each individual passenger in any other case;(c) save as provided in clause (d), where the vehicle is a vehicle of any other class, the amount of liability incurred;(d) irrespective of the class of the vehicle, a limit of rupees two thousand in all in respect of damage to any property of a third party.* * *(4) a policy shall be of no effect for the purposes of this chapter unless and until there is issued by the insurer in favour of the person by whom the policy is effected a certificate of insurance in the prescribed form and containing the prescribed particulars of any conditions subject to which the policy is issued and of any other prescribed matters; and different forms particulars and matters may be prescribed in different cases.(4-a) where a cover note issued by the insurer under the provisions of this chapter or the rules made thereunder is not followed by a policy of insurance within the prescribed time, the insurer shall, within seven days of the expiry of the period of the validity of the cover note, notify the fact to the registering authority in whose records the vehicle to which the cover note relates has been registered or to such other authority as the state government may prescribe.(5) notwithstanding anything elsewhere contained in any law, a person issuing a policy of insurance under this section shall be liable to indemnify the person or classes of person specified in the policy in respect of any liability which the policy purports to cover in the case of that person or those classes of person.5. section 147 of the motor vehicles act, 1988 prior to its amendment reads as under:"147. requirements of policies and limits of liability.-(1) in order to comply with the requirements of this chapter, a policy of insurance must be a policy which-(a) is issued by a person who is an authorized insurer; and(b) insures the person or classes of persons specified in the policy to the extent specified in sub-section (2)-(i) against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of the death of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place;(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of a public service vehicle cause by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place;provided that a policy shall not be required-(1) to cover liability in respect of the death, arising out of and in the course of his employment, of the employee of a person insured by the policy or in respect of bodily injury sustained by such an employee arising out of and in the course of his employment other than a liability arising under the workmen's compensation act, 1923 (8 of 1923), in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, and such employee-(a) engaged in driving the vehicle, or(b) if it is a public service vehicle engaged as a conductor of the vehicle or in examining tickets on the vehicle, or(c) if it is a goods carriage, being carried in the vehicle, or(ii) to cover any contractual liability.explanation.- for the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the death of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of a third party shall be deemed to have been caused by or to have arisen out of, the use of a vehicle in a public place notwithstanding that the person who is dead or injured or the property which is damaged was not in a public place at the time of the accident, if the act or omission which led to the accident occurred in a public place.(2) subject to the proviso to sub-section (1), a policy of insurance referred to in sub-section (1), shall cover any liability incurred in respect of any accident, up to the following limits, namely:-(a) save as provided in clause (b), the amount of liability incurred;(b) in respect of damage to any property of a third party, a limit of rupees six thousand;provided that any policy of insurance issued with any limited liability and in force, immediately before the commencement of this act, shall continue to be effective for a period of four months after such commencement or till the date of expiry of such policy whichever is earlier.(3) a policy shall be of no effect for the purposes of this chapter unless and until there is issued by the insurer in favour of the person by whom the policy is effected a certificate of insurance in the prescribed form and containing the prescribed particulars of any condition subject to which the policy is issued and of any other prescribed matters; and different forms, particulars and matters may be prescribed in different cases.(4) where a cover note issued by the insurer under the provisions of this chapter or the rules made thereunder is not followed by a policy of insurance within the prescribed time, the insurer shall within seven days of the expiry of the period of the validity of the cover note, notify the fact to the registering authority in whose records the vehicle to which the cover note relates has been registered or to such other authority as the state government may prescribe.(5) notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, an insurer issuing a policy of insurance under this section shall be liable to indemnify the person or classes of persons specified in the policy in respect of any liability which the policy purports to cover in the case of that person or those classes of persons."6. section 147 of the motor vehicles (amendment) act, 1994 reads as under:"147. requirements of policies and limits of liability.- (1) in order to comply with the requirements of this chapter, a policy of insurance must be a policy which-(a) .....(b) insures the person or classes of persons specified in the policy to the extent specified in sub-section (2)-(i) against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of the death of or bodily injury to any person, including owner of the goods or his authorised representative carried in the vehicle or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place;(ii) ....."7. before the tribunal, it was contended on behalf of the insurer that the insurer would not be liable to pay compensation for the death of the deceased who was going in a goods vehicle and met with death on account of an accident. the tribunal, however, came to the conclusion that in view of the decision of the supreme court in the case of mallawwa (smt.) and ors. v. oriental insurance co. ltd. and ors. - manu/sc/0749/1998manu/sc/0749/1998 : air1999sc589 , the insurer must be held liable and accordingly directed the compensation amount to be paid by the insurance company. the insurer carried an appeal to the high court, but the high court disposed of the appeal solely on the ground that the case is covered by the decision of this court in the case of new india assurance company v. sat pal singh and ors. - (2001) 1 scc 237.8. mr. rawat, learned counsel appearing for the appellant contended that the decision in mallawwa's case on which the tribunal relied upon is a decision interpreting the provisions of the old act of 1939, and in fact that decision cannot be of any assistance. in view of the fact that section 95(1) proviso (ii) of motor vehicles act, 1939, is not the same as section 147(2) of the motor vehicles act, 1988 as it stood prior to its amendment of 1994. mr. rawat contended that the decision of this court in new india assurance co. v. satpal singh is undoubtedly based on an interpretation of the proviso to section 147(1) of the motor vehicles act, 1988, but that decision cannot be held to be good law in as much as the court has not borne in mind the relevant provisions as it stood nor has it considered the effect of the amendment that was brought about in 1994 as well as the purpose of such amendment. the learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand contended that the subsequent amendment that was brought about in the year 1994 is merely clarificatory in nature and does not bring about any substantive change and further the act being a beneficial one, construction which is beneficial to the victims of the accident should be followed. judged from that angle, the decision of this court in new india assurance company v. sat pal singh and ors. (supra) does not require any reconsideration.9. under the motor vehicles act of 1939 the requirements of policies and limits of liability had been provided in section 95. proviso to section 95(1) of the said act unequivocally states that the policy shall not be required in case of a goods vehicle for passengers being carried in the said vehicle. in mallawwa (smt.) and ors. v. oriental insurance co. ltd. and ors. (supra) while approving the earlier decision of the court in pushpabai purshottam udeshi's case - manu/sc/0249/1977manu/sc/0249/1977 : [1977]3scr372 : [1977]3scr372, the court construed the provisions of section 95(1)(b) of the motor vehicles act, 1939 and held that while the expression 'any person' and the expression 'every motor vehicle' are in wide terms but by proviso (ii) it restricts the generality of the main provision by confining the requirement to cases where the vehicle is a vehicle in which passengers are carried for hire or reward or by reason of or in pursuance of a contract of employment, therefore, the vehicle had to be vehicle in which passengers are carried. the court further held that the goods vehicle cannot be held to be a passenger vehicle even if the vehicle was found to be used on some stray occasions for carrying passengers for hire or reward. undoubtedly mallawwa's case (supra) was dealing with a situation under the motor vehicle act, 1939.10. in satpal's case (supra) the court assumed that the provisions of section 95(1) of motor vehicles act 1939 are identical with section 147(1) of the motor vehicles act 1988, as it stood prior to its amendment. but a careful scrutiny of the provisions would make it clear that prior to the amendment of 1994 it was not necessary for the insurer to insure against the owner of the goods of his authorised representative being carried in a goods vehicle. on an erroneous impression this court came to the conclusion that the insurer would be liable to pay compensation in respect of the death or bodily injury caused to either the owner of the goods or his authorised representative when being carried in a goods vehicle the accident occurred. if the motor vehicle amended act of 1994 is examined, particularly section 46 of the act 6 of 1991 by which expression 'injury to any person' in the original act stood substituted by the expression 'injury to any person including owner of the goods or his authorised representative carried in the vehicle the conclusion is irresistible that prior to the aforesaid amendment act of 1994, even if widest interpretation is given to the expression 'to any person' it will not cover either the owner of the goods or his authorised representative being carried in the vehicle. the objects and reasons of clause 46 also states that it seeks to amend section 147 to include owner of the goods or his authorised representative carried in the vehicle for the purposes of liability under the insurance policy. it is no doubt true that sometimes the legislature amends the law by way of amplification and clarification of an inherent position which is there in the statute, but a plain meaning being given to the words used in the statute, as it stood prior to its amendment of 1994, and as it stands subsequent to its amendment in 1994 and bearing in mind the objects and reasons engrafted in the amended provisions referred to earlier, it is difficult for us to construe that the expression 'including owner of the goods or his authorised representative carried in the vehicle which was added to the pre-existed expression 'injury to any person' is either clarificatory or amplification of the pre-existing statute. on the other hand it clearly demonstrates that the legislature wanted to bring within the sweep of section 147 and making it compulsory for the insurer to insure even in case of a goods vehicle, the owner of the goods or his authorised representative being carried in a goods vehicle when that vehicle met with an accident and the owner of the goods or his representative either dies or suffers bodily injury. the judgment of this court in satpal's case, therefore must be held to have not been correctly decided and the impugned judgment of the tribunal as well as that of the high court accordingly are set aside and these appeals are allowed. it is held that the insurer will not be liable for paying compensation to the owner of goods or his authorised representative on being carried in a goods vehicle when that vehicle meets with an accident and the owner of goods or his representative dies or suffers any bodily injury.s.b. sinha, j.11. leave granted in special leave petitions.12. though i respectfully agree with the judgment and order proposed to be delivered by my lord, the chief justice of india; having regard to the importance of the questions involved in the matter, i would like to add a few words of mine.13. it is not in dispute that in this batch of appeals, the cause of action in each case arose prior to coming into force of 1994 amendment in the motor vehicles act, 1988, and, thus, the effect thereof would have not bearing in the instant case.14. the controversy in the instant case centers round the changes effected in the motor vehicles act, 1988 vis-a-vis the motor vehicles act, 1939. as would appear from the discussions made hereinafter a goods vehicle was required to be compulsorily covered by insurance policy in terms of 1939 act but was not so required in terms of 1988 act.15. before adverting to the pointed issue, we may notice the definition of "goods vehicles", "public service vehicle" and "stage carriage" and "transport vehicle" occurring in sections 2(8), 2(25), 2(29) and 2(33) of 1939 act, which are as under:-"2(8) "goods vehicle" means any motor vehicle constructed or adopted for use for the carriage of goods, or any motor vehicle not so constructed or adapted when used for the carriage of goods solely or in addition to passengers:""2(25) "public service vehicle" means any motor vehicle used or adapted to be used for the carriage of passengers for hire or reward, and includes a motor cab, contract carriage, and stage carriage;""2(29) "stage carriage" means a motor vehicle carrying or adapted to carry more than six persons excluding the driver which carries passengers for hire or reward at separate fares paid by or for individual passengers, either for the whole journey or for stages of the journey;""2(33) "transport vehicle" means a public service vehicle or a goods vehicle;"16. sections 2(14), 2(35), 2(4) and 2(47) of 1988 act define "goods carriage", "public service vehicle", "stage carriage" and "transport vehicle" in the following terms:-"2(14) "good carriage", any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use solely for the carriage of goods, or any motor vehicle not so constructed or adapted when used for the carriage of goods;""2(35) "public service vehicle" means any motor vehicle used or adapted to be used for the carriage of passengers for hire or reward, and includes a maxicab, a motorcab, contract carriage, and stage carriage;""2(40) "stage carriage" means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six passengers excluding the driver for hire or reward at separate fares paid by or for individual passengers, either for the whole journey or for stages of the journey;""2(47) "transport vehicle" means a public service vehicle, a goods carriage, an educational institution bus or a private service vehicle;"17. the changes effected in the respective terminologies in the 1988 act have a bearing on the question involved in these appeals.18. chapter viii of 1939 act and chapter xi of 1988 act deal with insurance of motor vehicles against third party risks.19. liability has been defined in section 145(c) as under-"'liability', wherever used in relation to the death of or bodily injury to any person, includes liability in respect thereof under section 140;"20. section 146 specifies the necessity for insurance against third party risk. in terms thereof an owner of a motor vehicle is statutorily enjoined to have a policy of insurance complying with the requirements of the said chapter before the uses or causes or allows any other person to use a motor vehicle in public.21. section 147 deals with requirements of policies and limits of liability. proviso appended thereto, however, makes an exception to the main provision which reads thus:-"provided that a policy shall not be required-(i) to cover liability in respect of the death, arising out of an in the course of his employment, of the employee of a person insured by the policy or in respect of bodily injury sustained by such an employee arising out of and in the course of his employment other than a liability arising under the workmen's compensation act, 1923 (8 of 1923) in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, any such employee-(a) engaged in driving the vehicle, or(b) if it is a public service vehicle engaged as conductor of the vehicle or in examining tickets on the vehicle, or(c) if it is a goods carriage, being carried in the vehicle, or(ii) to cover any contractual liability."22. we may notice that the proviso appended to section 95 of 1939 act contained clause (ii) which has been omitted in the 1988 act and reads as under:-"except where the vehicle is a vehicle in which passengers are carried for hire or reward or by reason of or in pursuance of a contract of employment, to cover liability in respect of the death of or bodily injury to persons being carried in or upon or entering or mounting or alighting from the vehicle at the time of the occurrence of the event out of which a claim arises."23. thus, it may be noticed that so far as employees of the owner of the motor vehicle are concerned, an insurance policy was not required to be taken in relation to their liability other than arising in terms of the provisions of the workmen's compensation act, 1923. on the other hand, proviso (ii) appended to section 95 of 1939 act, enjoined a statutory liability upon the owner of the vehicle to take out an insurance policy to cover the liability in respect of a person who was travelling in a vehicle pursuant to a contract of employment. the legislative has consciously not inserted the said provision in 1988 act.24. the applicability of decision of this court in mallawwa (smt.) and ors. v. oriental insurance company ltd. and ors. manu/sc/0749/1998manu/sc/0749/1998 : air1999sc589 in this case must be considered keeping that aspect in view. section 2(35) of 1988 act does not include passengers in goods carriage whereas section 2(25) of 1939 act did as even passengers could be carried in a goods vehicle. the difference in the definitions of the "goods vehicle" in 1939 act and "goods carriage" in 1988 act is significant. by reason of the change in the definitions of the terminology, the legislature intended that a goods vehicle could not carry any passenger, as the words "in addition to passengers" occurring in the definition of goods vehicle in 1939 act were omitted. furthermore, it categorically states that 'goods carriage' would mean a motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use "solely for the carriage of goods". carrying of passengers in a 'goods carriage', thus, is not contemplated under 1988 act.25. we have further noticed that section 147 of 1988 act prescribing the requirements of an insurance policy does not contain a provision similar to clause (ii) of the proviso appended to section 95 of 1939 act. the decisions of this court in mallawwa's case (supra) must be held to have been rendered having regard to the aforementioned provisions.26. section 147 of 1988 act, inter alia, prescribes compulsory coverage against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of "public service vehicle". proviso appended thereto categorically states that compulsory coverage in respect of drivers and conductors of public service vehicle and employees carried in a goods vehicle would be limited to the liability under the workmen's compensation act. it does not speak of any passenger in a 'good carriage'.27. in view of the changes in the relevant provisions in 1988 act vis-a-vis 1939 act, we are of the opinion that the meaning of the words "any person" must also be attributed having regard to the context in which they have been used i.e. 'a third party'. keeping in view the provisions of 1988 act, we are of the opinion that as the provisions thereof do not enjoin any statutory liability on the owner of a vehicle to get his vehicle insured for any passenger travelling in a goods vehicle, the insurers would not be liable therefore.28. furthermore, sub-clauses (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 147 speaks of liability which may be incurred by the owner of a vehicle in respect of death of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place, whereas sub-clause (ii) thereof deals with liability which may be incurred by the owner of a vehicle against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of a public service vehicle caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place.29. an owner of a passenger carrying vehicle must be premium for covering the risks of the passengers. if a liability other than the limited liability provided for under the act is to be enhanced under an insurance policy, additional premium is required to be paid. but if the ratio of this court's decision in new india assurance company v. satpal singh and ors. manu/sc/0751/1999manu/sc/0751/1999 : air2000sc235 is taken to its logical conclusion, although for such passengers, the owner of a goods carriage need not take out an insurance policy, they would be deemed to have been covered under the policy where for even no premium is required to be paid.30. we may consider the matter from another angle. section 149(2) of the 1988 act enables the insurers to raise defences against the claim of the claimants. in terms of clause (c) of sub-section 2 of section 149 of the act one of the defences which is available to the insurer is that the vehicle in question has been used for a purpose not allowed by the permit under which the vehicle was used. such a statutory defence available to the insurer would be obliterated in view of the decision of this court in satpal singh's case (supra).31. for the foregoing reasons. i am in respect agreement with my lord the chief justice of india that the decision of this court in new india assurance company v. satpal singh and ors. manu/sc/0751/1999manu/sc/0751/1999 : air2000sc235 has not laid down the law correctly and should be overruled.(14. the controversy in the instant case centers round the changes effected in the motor vehicles act, 1988 vis-a-vis the motor vehicles act, 1939. as would appear from the discussions made hereinafter a goods vehicle was required to be compulsorily covered by insurance policy in terms of 1939 act but was not so required in terms of 1988 act.)
dipak misra, j.1. a deep rooted desire strongly planted in unsatisfied ambition has compelled the appellant to paint a picture with the colour of 'reservation' on a constitutional foundation eventually with immense aspiration that he can achieve it by sheer assertion and repeated asseveration of the proposition that a singular post in a cadre cannot be reserved, totally ostracizing the contrary perception that the principle of reservation, as is understood in the constitutional bedrock, is absolutely foreign to the concept.2. presently to the factual expose. the first respondent was appointed as daftari on 1.7.1975 in kisan uchchatar madhyamic vidyalaya, hidra, kanwar, basti, a recognised intermediate college governed by the u.p. intermediate education act, 1921 (for short, "the 1921 act") and he became a permanent employee with effect from 13.10.1981. he passed the high school education in the year 1997 and thereafter the intermediate examination in the year 2000 as a consequence of which he became eligible for consideration of promotion for the post of clerk. on 30.6.2003, roop narain singh who was working as a clerk, on attaining the age of superannuation stood superannuated and one assistant teacher remained incharge. after retirement of roop narain singh, the first respondent submitted an application to the district inspector of schools, through the principal for his promotion to the post of clerk. the concerned principal forwarded the said application on 14.7.2003 to the district inspector of schools along with the seniority list. as no response was received from the district inspector of schools relating to the promotion of the first respondent, the principal sent a reminder. it needs to be stated that as there was no committee of management in the institute, the assistant district inspector of schools was functioning as the management controller and despite his best efforts he could not hold the elections. the authorities advertised in a newspaper for filling up of the post of clerk and because of the said advertisement, the approval for the post of promotion as far as first respondent is concerned was not given and he felt grieved thereby.3. as the factual narration would unveil, the first respondent submitted a representation to the joint director of education on 22.6.2006, but nothing affirmative ensued and in the meantime the present appellant akhilesh kumar singh was appointed. being dissatisfied with the same, the first respondent invoked the jurisdiction of high court in writ petition no. 39738 of 2006. the learned single judge taking note of the fact that the claim of the writ petitioner seeking promotion to the post of clerk was untenable inasmuch as there was a singular post in the cadre of clerk duly sanctioned and created in the institution and in such circumstances the said post could not be reserved for promotion from amongst the class iv employees. however, the learned single judge observed that if the writ petitioner felt that the appointment of the selected candidate by direct recruitment was patently illegal and de hors the rules, he could submit a representation to the district inspector of schools and, in that event, the authority concerned shall pass a reasoned and speaking order keeping in view the various provisions of the 1921 act.4. being dissatisfied with the said order, the 1st respondent herein preferred special appeal no. 648 of 2006. the division bench encapsuled the controversy in a short compass, that is, whether a single post of class iii available in an intermediate college governed by the act could be filled up only by promotion or by direct recruitment. the division bench referred to an earlier division bench judgment in jai bhagwan singh v. district inspector of schools, gautambudh nagar and ors. manu/up/0643/2006manu/up/0643/2006 : 2006 3 uplbec 2391 and came to hold that a single post of class iii available in intermediate college governed by the 1921 act can be filled up by promotion and the earlier decision in palak dhari yadav manu/up/0605/1999manu/up/0605/1999 : 1999 3 uplbec 2315 was not legally sound. on the base of the said reasoning, the division bench annulled the decision rendered by the learned single judge. the said judgment and order passed by the division bench is under assail in this appeal by special leave.5. we have heard mr. parmanand gaur, learned counsel for the appellant and mr. hariom yaduvanshi, mr. gagan gupta and mr. vivek vishnoi, learned counsel for the respondents.6. it is imperative to note at the outset that there is no dispute with regard to the factual score. the institution is covered by the 1921 act. a set of regulations has been framed under the said act providing for promotion from class iv to class iii. regulation 2 which is relevant for the present purpose is reproduced below:2. (1) for the purpose of appointments of clerks and fourth class employees the minimum educational qualification would be the same as has been fixed from time to time for the equivalent employees of government higher secondary schools.(2) fifty percent of the total number of sanctioned posts of head clerk and clerks shall be filled among the serving clerks and employees through promotion. if employee possesses prescribed eligibility and he has served continuously for 5 years on his substantive post and his service record is good, then promotion shall be made on the basis of seniority, subject to rejection of the unfit. if any employee is aggrieved by any decision or order of the management committee in this respect then he can make representation against it to the inspector within two weeks from the date of such decision or order. inspector on such representation can make such orders as he thinks fit. decision of the inspector would be final and promptly executed by the management.note: in calculating fifty percent of posts parts less than half would be left and half or more that half post would be deemed as one.7. on a plain reading of the aforesaid regulation, it is quite luminous that the "note" appended to it makes it abundantly clear that there is a singular post. the regulation lays down the postulates for filling up of the post. the crux of the matter is whether in the instant case a cadre that constitutes of a single post has been reserved.in post graduate institute of medical education and research, chandigarh v. faculty association and ors. manu/sc/0292/1998manu/sc/0292/1998 : (1998) 4 scc 1, the constitution bench was considering the correctness of the decision rendered in union of india v. madhav manu/sc/0798/1997manu/sc/0798/1997 : (1997) 2 scc 332. apart from many a contention, it was also submitted before this court that for implementing 50-point roster, isolated and separate posts in different specialities cannot be clubbed together and reservation of posts by applying the roster can be made only where there are more than one post and reservation of only one post cannot be made because such reservation would amount to 100% reservation which would violate article 16(1) and article 16(4) of the constitution. the constitution bench after discussing the law at length has held:34. in a single post cadre, reservation at any point of time on account of rotation of roster is bound to bring about a situation where such a single post in the cadre will be kept reserved exclusively for the members of the backward classes and in total exclusion of the general members of the public. such total exclusion of general members of the public and cent per cent reservation for the backward classes is not permissible within the constitutional framework. the decisions of this court to this effect over the decades have been consistent.35. hence, until there is plurality of posts in a cadre, the question of reservation will not arise because any attempt of reservation by whatever means and even with the device of rotation of roster in a single post cadre is bound to create 100% reservation of such post whenever such reservation is to be implemented. the device of rotation of roster in respect of single post cadre will only mean that on some occasions there will be complete reservation and the appointment to such post is kept out of bounds to the members of a large segment of the community who do not belong to any reserved class, but on some other occasions the post will be available for open competition when in fact on all such occasions, a single post cadre should have been filled only by open competition amongst all segments of the society.8. from the aforesaid enunciation of law, it is eminently explicit that reservation for a single post in a cadre will keep the general members of the public in total exclusion and the question of reservation will arise when there is plurality of post in the cadre. needless to say that the constitution bench has been stating about the reservation with regard to the scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and other backward classes. it does not lay down that if a post is meant to be filled up by promotion from amongst the employees working in the feeder cadre, it would tantamount to reservation. reservation is only restricted to the scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and other backward classes. it does not relate to the persons serving in the feeder cadre.9. in state of punjab and ors. v. r.n. bhatnagar and anr. manu/sc/0802/1998manu/sc/0802/1998 : (1999) 2 scc 330, it has been laid down that when posts in a cadre are to be filled in from two sources, whether the candidate comes from the source of departmental promotees or by way of direct recruitment, once both of them enter a common cadre, their birthmarks disappear and they get completely integrated in the common cadre and it is in consonance with the thrust of article 16(1) of the constitution of india. the court further observed that no question of exception to the said general thrust of the constitutional provision would survive as article 16(4) would be out of the picture in such a case.10. in this context, a reference to a two-judge bench decision in kuldeep kumar gupta and ors. v. h.p. state electricity board and ors. manu/sc/0803/2000manu/sc/0803/2000 : (2001) 1 scc 475 is apposite. in the said case, a contention was advanced that providing a quota tantamounts to reservation. repelling the said submission, it was ruled:article 16 deals with equality of opportunity in matters of public employment and article 16(4) enables the state in making any provision for reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which in the opinion of the state is not adequately represented in the services under the state. this court in indra sawhney manu/sc/0665/1992manu/sc/0665/1992 : 1992 supp (3) scc 217 case has held that no such reservation is permissible in the promotional posts and to get over the said decision article 16(4-a) has been inserted by the constitution (seventy-seventh amendment) act. but we fail to understand as to how providing a quota for a specified category of personnel in the promotional post can be held to be a reservation within the ambit of article 16(4). providing a quota is not new in the service jurisprudence and whenever the feeder category itself consists of different category of persons and when they are considered for any promotion, the employer fixes a quota for each category so that the promotional cadre would be equibalanced and at the same time each category of persons in the feeder category would get the opportunity of being considered for promotion. this is also in a sense in the larger interest of the administration when it is the employer, who is best suited to decide the percentage of posts in the promotional cadre, which can be earmarked for different category of persons. in other words this provision actually effectuates the constitutional mandate engrafted in article 16(1), as it would offer equality of opportunity in the matters relating to employment and it would not be the monopoly of a specified category of persons in the feeder category to get promotions. we, therefore, do not find any infraction of the constitutional provision engrafted in article 16(4) while providing a quota in the promotional cadre, as in our view it does not tantamount to reservation.11. the purpose of referring to the aforesaid decisions is that the concept of reservation finds place in article 16(4) and does not apply to the concept of quota from the feeder cadre. in the instant case, the regulation provides for 50% of the total number of posts to be promoted through promotion. the "note" appended is an inseparable part of the regulation and it lays down that in calculation of the 50% of the post less than half would be left and half or more than half post would be deemed as one. therefore, if a singular post in the clerical cadre is there, it would be filled up by promotion from amongst the eligible candidates from the feeder cadre. adopting such a method or taking such route does not remotely touch the idea of reservation. hence, the submission put forth by the learned counsel for the appellant sans substance.12. in view of the aforesaid premises, we do not perceive any merit in this appeal and accordingly, the same stands dismissed without any order as to costs.
arijit pasayat, j.1. appeal preferred by appellant-megh singh questioning his conviction under section 15 of the narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances act, 1985 (for short the 'act') was dismissed by learned single judge of the punjab and haryana high court by the impugned judgment. he has questioned the legality thereof tin the present appeal.2. the compass of controversy as unfolded during trial by the prosecution is as follows:on 22.2.1993, police party headed by si chanan singh, in-charge of police station dharamgarh (pw 1/b) was going on kacha road towards drain from village dharamgarh in connection with patrol duty and when they reached near brick kiln, santa singh son of bachan singh met them and joined in the police party. when the police party was little short of the drain, they saw three persons sitting on gunny bags. two of them fled from the spot and the third one, accused-appellant megh singh was apprehended. he disclosed the names of the persons who had run away to be baldev singh and pillu. twenty-five bags containing poppy husk were found at the spot. two samples of 250 gms. were taken from such bag and after taking the samples, weight of bags was found to be 36 kgs. 500 gms. each. all the fifty samples and 25 bags of poppy husk were sealed with seal 'cs' which after use was handed over to hs mithu singh (pw-2). the case property was taken into possession vide recovery memo exhibit pc attested by witnesses including santa singh. on the basis of ruqa exhibit pe. f.i.r. exhibit pe/1 was registered. baldev singh who had run away from the spot was arrested on 27.2.1993 and pillu singh was arrested on 10.3.1993. case property was produced before baldev singh, sho of police station, sunam (pw-3) who verified the investigation and sealed the same with seal 'bs'. on chemical examination, the samples were found to be of poppy husk vide report exhibit pk.3. trial court after considering the evidence on record held that the accusations against appellant megh singh have been found established; accordingly convicted him under section 15 of the act and sentenced him to undergo ri for 10 years and to pay a fine of rs. 1 lakh with default condition of further ri for 1 year. appellant challenged the conviction and sentence before the high court. primary stand was that accused had been arrested on 19.2.1993 and telegram had been sent in that regard to the police officials. it was contended that when benefit of doubt has been given to the other co-accused persons, there was no basis for convicting the accused-appellant. there was no material to show any conscious possession which is sine qua non for conviction under section 15 of the act. in any event, requirements of section 50 were not complied with. high court discarded the plea regarding arrest of megh singh on 19.2.1993 on the ground that the evidence on record establishes that the application/telegram was received on 24.2.1993 and merely because an earlier date was indicated, it cannot be said that the accused was really arrested on 19.2.1993. coming to the plea of conscious possession it was held that the prosecution had produced ample evidence that accused was in physical possession and in terms of section 54 of the act conscious possession was presumed unless proved to the contrary. accused has failed to do so. therefore, conscious possession was established. accordingly the appeal filed by the accused was dismissed. it was further held that section 50 has no application because there was no personal search of the applicant. consequentially conviction and sentence were upheld.4. learned counsel appearing for the accused-appellant submitted that the facts of the case greatly resemblance with that of avtar singh and ors. v. state of punjab . since conscious possession has not been proved, the conviction of the accused-appellant cannot be stand on a different footing from those co-accused who have been acquitted. non-compliance with requirements of section 50 of the act vitiates the conviction.5. in response, learned counsel for the respondent-(sic) submitted that conscious possession has been established and by application of logic of section 54 of the act when physical possession is established, there is presumption of conscious possession. merely because co-accused persons have been acquitted that cannot be a factor to hold the accused-appellant innocent. it is submitted that since there was no personal search. section 50 of the act has no application.6. whether there was conscious possession has to be determined with reference to the factual backdrop. the facts which can be culled out from the evidence on record is that the accused was sitting atop gunny bags containing the contraband articles.7. section 20(b) makes possession of contraband articles an offence. section 20 appears in chapter iv of the act which relates to offence for possession of such articles. it is submitted that in order to make the possession illicit, there must be a conscious possession.8. it is highlighted that unless the possession was coupled with requisite mental element, i.e. conscious possession and not mere custody without awareness of the nature of such possession, section 20 is not attracted.9. the expression 'possession' is polymorphous term which assumes different colours in different contexts. it may carry different meanings in contextually different backgrounds. it is impossible, as was observed in superintendent & remembrancer of legal affairs, west bengal v. anil kumar bhunja and ors. manu/sc/0266/1979manu/sc/0266/1979 : 1979crilj1390 , to work out a completely logical and precise definition of "possession" uniformly applicable to all situations in the context of all statutes.10. the word 'conscious' mean awareness about a particular fact. it is a state of mind which is deliberate or intended.11. as noted in gunwantlal v. the state of m.p. manu/sc/0130/1972manu/sc/0130/1972 : 1972crilj1187 possession in a given case need not be physical possession but can be constructive, having power and control over the article in case in question, while the person whom physical possession is given holds it subject to that power or control.12. the word 'possession' means the legal right to possession (see health v. drown (1972) (2) all er 561. in an interesting case it was observed that where a person keeps his fire arm in his mother's flat which is safer than his own home, he must be considered to be in possession of the same. (see sullivan v. earl of caithness 1976 (1) all er 844.13. once possession is established the person who claims that it was not a conscious possession has to establish it, because how he came to be in possession is within his special knowledge. section 35 of the act gives a statutory recognition of this position because of presumption available in law. similar is the position in terms of section 54 where also presumption is available to be drawn from possession of illicit articles. this position was highlighted in madan lal and anr. v. state of himachal pradesh manu/sc/0599/2003manu/sc/0599/2003 : 2003crilj386814. in the factual scenario of the present case not only possession but conscious possession has been established. it has not been shown by the accused-appellant that the possession was not conscious in the logical background of sections 35 and 54 of the act.15. now comes the question whether there was non-compliance of section 50 of the act.16. a bare reading of section 50 shows that it only applies in case of personal search of a person. it does not extend to search of a vehicle or a container or a bag, or premises. (see kalema tumba v. state of maharashtra and anr. manu/sc/0662/1999manu/sc/0662/1999 : 2000crilj507 , the state of punjab v. baldev singh manu/sc/0981/1999manu/sc/0981/1999 : 1999crilj3672 , gurbax singh v. state of haryana manu/sc/0083/2001manu/sc/0083/2001 : 2001crilj1166 . the language of section 50 is implicitly clear that the search has to be in relation to a person as contrasted to search of premises, vehicles or articles. this position was settled beyond doubt by the constitution bench in baldev singh's case (supra). above being the position, the contention regarding non-compliance of section 50 of the act is also without any substance.17. the decision in avtar singh and ors. v. state of punjab was rendered in a different factual background. in that case the articles were being carried in a truck. there were several persons in the truck. it had not been established by evidence that any one of them had any conscious possession. that also was not the only factor taken note of. while the accused was examined under section 313 of the code of criminal procedure, 1973 (for short 'the code'), the essence of accusations was not brought to his notice, more particularly with possession aspect. it was also noticed that the possibility of the accused persons being labourers of the truck was not ruled by the evidence. since the decision was rendered on consideration of several peculiar factual aspects specially noticed in that case, it is of no assistance to the accused also.18. circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different fact may make a world of difference between conclusions in two cases or between two accused in the same case. each case depends on its own facts and a close similarity between one case and another is not enough because a single significant detail may alter the entire aspect. it is more pronounced in criminal cases where the backbone of adjudication is fact based.19. we find no substance in this appeal, which deserves dismissal, and we so direct.
kurian joseph, j.1. we have heard learned counsel for the parties.2. leave granted.3. the short issue raised in these appeals pertains to the stamp duty payable by the developer and the allottees under sections 33/47(a) of the indian stamp act, 1899.4. in a writ petition filed by the developer, in respect of the bipartite agreement between the state and the developer, the high court by judgment dated 4th august, 2011 relegated the developer to the competent authority. however, in the writ petitions filed by the allottees of the developer, by another judgment dated 16th august, 2011, the high court took the view that even in respect of the tripartite agreement between the state on the one hand and the developer and allottees on the other hand also, full stamp duty is payable on the basis that the arrangement is a lease. before us, several contentions are taken, some of which we may refer below:1. whether the tripartite agreement qua the allottees is a lease, is a matter to be adjudicated by the competent authority and therefore, the high court was not justified in going to that issue;2. the allottees were in any case exempted from payment of the stamp duty.there are a few other contentions as well.5. in our view, bereft of the required materials before the high court, the court was not justified in adjudicating the issue at the first instance when there is a statutory scheme provided for adjudication of such issues by the competent authorities concerned.6. in that view of the matter, without expressing any further opinion, we set aside the judgment dated 16.8.2011 in civil miscellaneous writ petition no. 73277 of 2010 and other connected matters. the parties are relegated to the competent authority under the indian stamp act in the state of uttar pradesh for the adjudication of the dispute. we direct the authority concerned to issue notice to the parties, hear them and pass final orders on merits on the dispute within a period of six months from today.7. as far as writ petition 40656 of 2004 filed by the developer leading to the judgment dated 4.8.2011 is concerned, we are informed that during the pendency of the special leave petition before this court, the adjudicating authority has passed an order on 16.1.2015 and thereafter the matter was carried before the appellate authority and the appellate authority passed an order on 22.4.2015 and the issue is now before the high court. it appears that the authorities have passed such orders on different dates and therefore, similar other matters are consequently before the high court.8. therefore, we express no opinion on the legality or otherwise of the orders passed by the competent authorities, since it is for the parties to take up all available contentions before the high court and it is for the high court to pass appropriate orders.9. having regard to the fact that the issue has been pending since long, we request the high court to dispose of the writ petitions expeditiously.10. the civil appeals are, accordingly, disposed of.11. no order as to costs.
1. the respondent is manufacturing motor vehicles and it had availed of modvat credit of the duty paid on inputs under rule 57a of the central excise rules. as it had not paid any excise duty on the raw material, it became liable to pay excise duty on the waste and scrap of aluminium and iron and steel which scrap had been sold by the respondent.2. the collector raised a demand of excise duty on the waste and scrap which was sold. the demand was challenged by the respondent who contended that excise duty was not payable. having been unsuccessful before the collector, an appeal was filed before the customs, excise and gold (control) appellate tribunal. the tribunal by the impugned order came to the conclusion that excise duty was payable on the scrap sold by the respondent. it further came to the conclusion that the price on which the waste and scrap had been sold should be considered to be cum-duty price and the assessable value should be determined after deducting the element of excise duty. it is this part of the decision of the tribunal which is sought to be challenged by the revenue in this appeal.3. the respondent had sold the scrap and according to it the purchaser was not liable to pay any amount in addition thereto and it is for this reason the tribunal regarded this transaction as being one of cum-duty price.4. section 4 of the central excises and salt act, 1944 provides for valuation of excisable goods for purpose of charging of duty of excise. under section 4(1), the duty of excise is chargeable on any excisable goods with reference to the value which is deemed to be the price at which such goods are ordinarily sold by the assessee to a buyer in the course of wholesale trade where the buyer is not a related person and the price is the sole consideration for the sale. section 4(4)(d)(ii) states that value in relation to any excisable goods does not include the amount of duty of excise, sales tax and other taxes, if any, payable on such goods and, subject to such rules as may be made, the trade discount., etc., is also to be allowed as a deduction.5. a reading of the aforesaid section clearly indicates that the wholesale price which is charged is deemed to be the value for the purpose of levy of excise duty, by the element of excise duty, sales tax, or other taxes which is included in the wholesale price is to be excluded in arriving at the excisable value. this section has been so construed by this court in asstt. collector of central excise and ors v. bata india ltd., manu/sc/1167/1996manu/sc/1167/1996 : 1996(84)elt164(sc) : 1996(84)elt164(sc) , and it is thus clear that when cum-duty price is charged, then in arriving at the excisable value of the goods the element of duty which is payable has to be excluded. the tribunal has, therefore, rightly proceeded on the basis that the amount realised by the respondent from the sale of scrap has to be regarded as a normal wholesale price and in determining the value on which excise duty is payable the element of excise duty which must be regarded as having been incorporated in the sale price, must be excluded. there is nothing to show that once the demand was raised by the department, the respondent sought to recover the same from the purchaser of scrap. the facts indicate that after the sale transaction was completed, the purchaser was under no obligation to pay any extra amount to the seller, namely, the respondent. in such a transaction, it is the seller who takes on the obligation of paying all taxes on the goods sold and in such a case the said taxes on the goods sold are to be deducted under section 4(4)(d)(ii) and this is precisely what has been directed by the tribunal. there is also nothing to show that the sale price was not cum-duty.6. it will be useful here to refer to the observations of this court in hindustan sugar mills v. state of rajasthan and ors., manu/sc/0335/1978manu/sc/0335/1978 : [1979]1scr276 , at page 280, as follows :"take for example, excise duty payable by a dealer who is a manufacturer. when he sells goods manufactured by him, he always passes on the excise duty to the purchaser. ordinarily it is no shown is a separate item in the bill, but it is included in the price charged by him. the 'sale price' in such a case could be the entire price inclusive of excise duty because that would be the consideration payable by the purchaser for the sale of the goods. true, the excise duty component of the price would not be an addition to the coffers of the dealer, as it would go to reimburse him in respect of the excise duty already paid by him on the manufacture of the goods. but, even so, it would be part of the 'sale price' because it forms a component of the consideration payable by the purchaser to the dealer. it is only as part of the consideration for the sale of the goods that the amount representing excise duty would be payable by the purchaser. there is no other manner of liability, statutory or otherwise, under which the purchaser would be liable to pay the amount of excise duty to the dealer. and, on this reasoning, it would make no difference whether the amount of excise duty is included in the price charged by the dealer or is shown as a separate item in the bill. in either case, it would be part of the 'sale price'. ....."7. the example given in the aforesaid decision is clearly applicable in the present case. the sale price realised by the respondent has to be regarded as the entire price inclusive of excise duty because it is the respondent who has, by necessary implication, taken on the liability to pay all taxes on the goods sold and has not sought to realise any sum in addition to the price obtained by it from the purchase. the purchaser was under no obligation to pay any amount in excess of what had already been paid as the price of the scrap.8. under the circumstances, the tribunal was right in directing that the respondent is entitled to the benefit of section 4(4)(d)(ii) of the central excises & salt act.9. for the aforesaid reason, this appeal is dismissed. no costs.10. for the reasons stated in our order passed today in civil appeal no. 3783 of 2000 entitled commissioner of central excise, delhi vs. maruti udyog ltd., these appeals are dismissed.civil appeal no. 3913/200111. after hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we see no reason to interfere with the decision of the tribunal. hence, the civil appeal is dismissed.
m.b. shah, j.1. leave granted.2. appellant was convicted by the special judge, city civil court. ahmedabad by judgment and order dated 10.9.1997 for the offence punishable under section 7 of the prevention of corruption act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as "the act") and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for six months and to pay a fine of rs. 500, in default of payment of which to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for 15 days. he was also convicted for offence punishable under sections 13(1)(d) and 13(2) of the act and was sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of rs. 500/- in default to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for 15 days. against that judgment and order appellant preferred criminal appeal no. 881/97 before the high court of gujarat at ahmedabad. the high court dismissed the said appeal by passing the impugned judgment. that order is challenged by filling this appeal.3. at the time of admission hearing, this court passed the following order:--"considering the contentions raised by learned counsel for the petitioner and the evidence on record the impugned order passed by special judge and confirmed by the high court with regard to the conviction of the petitioner under section 7 of the prevention of corruption act cannot be assailed in any manner. hence with regard to that part of the judgment this petition is dismissed. however, with regard to the conviction of the petitioner under section 13(1)(d) issue notice returnable on 9th january, 2002."4. thereafter, the matter was directed to be placed on an non- miscellaneous day for final hearing.5. the learned senior counsel mr. anand appearing on behalf of appellant submitted that the judgment and order passed by the high court confirming the conviction of the appellant under section 13(1)(d)(i) of the act is on the face of it illegal and erroneous. he submitted that for convicting the appellant for the offence under section 13(1)(d), the prosecution must establish that by corrupt and illegal means accused has obtained for himself or for any other person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage. he submitted that in the present case, there is no evidence on record that appellant 'obtained' any amount by corrupt or illegal means.6. in our view, mere acceptance of money without there being any other evidence would not be sufficient for convicting the accused under section 13(1)(d)(i), section 13(1)(d) is as under:--" 13. criminal misconduct by a public servant - (1) a public servant is said to commit the offence of criminal misconduct,(b) if he,-(i) by corrupt or illegal means obtains for himself or for any other person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage or(ii) by abusing his position as a public servant obtains for himself or for any other person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage or(iii) while holding office as a public servant, obtains for any person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage without any public interest."7. in section 7 and 13(1)(a) and (b) of the act the legislature has specifically used the words 'accepts' or 'obtains'. as against this there is departure in the language used in clause (1)(d) of section 13 and it has omitted the word 'accepts' and has emphasized the word 'obtains'. further, the ingredient of sub-clause (i) is that by corrupt or illegal means, a public servant obtains any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage; under clause (ii), he obtains such thing by abusing his position as public servant and sub-clause (iii) contemplates that while holding office as the public servant he obtains for any person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage without any public interest. therefore, for convicting the person under section 13(1)(d), there must be evidence on record that accused 'obtained' for himself or for any other person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage by either corrupt or illegal means or by abusing his position as a public servant or he obtained for any person any valuable thing of pecuniary advantage without any public interest.8. this court interpreted similar provisions under the prevention of corruption act, 1947 in ram krishan and anr. v. the state of delhi [(1956) scr 183]. in the said case, the court dealt with similar clause (d) of sub-section 1 of section 5 and held that there must be proof that the public servant adopted corrupt or illegal means and thereby obtained for himself or for any other person any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage. the court observed --"in one sense, this is no doubt true but it does not follow that there is no overlapping of offences. we have primarily to look at the language employed and give effect to it. one class of cases might arise when corrupt or illegal means are adopted or perused by the public servant to gain for himself a pecuniary advantage. the word "obtains", on which much stress was laid does not eliminate the idea of acceptance of what is given or offered to be given, though it connotes also an element of effort on the part of the receiver. one may accept money that is offered or solicit payment of a bribe or extort the bribe by threat or coercion; in each case he obtains a pecuniary advantage by abusing his position as a public servant..."9. the court further observed that--"....it is enough if by abusing his position as a public servant a man obtains for himself any pecuniary advantage, entirely irrespective of motive or reward for showing favour or disfavour..."10. similarly , in m.w. mohiuddin v. state of maharashtra manu/sc/0690/1995manu/sc/0690/1995 : [1995]2scr864 the court dealt with section 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) and after referring to the decision quoted above as well as dictionary meaning of word "obtains" observed -- whether there was an acceptance of what is given as a bribe and whether there was an effort on the part of the receiver to obtain the pecuniary advantage by way of acceptance of the bribe depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. in that case, the court held that it was proved that accused made a demand and also got the affirmation from the complainant that he had brought the demanded money and at his instance, the complainant wrapped the money in the handkerchief given by the accused and placed the same on the bag which was brought by the accused and as asked by him, these steps have been taken into consideration in arriving at the conclusion that the accused had in fact "obtained" the pecuniary advantage, namely, that he received the illegal gratification. therefore, the court upheld the conviction under section 13(1)(d). lastly, in c.k. damodaran nair v. govt. of india manu/sc/0145/1997manu/sc/0145/1997 : 1997crilj739 , this court considered the word "obtain" used in section 5(1)(d) and held as under -"12. the position will however, be different so far as an offence under section 5(1)(d) read with section 5(2) of the act is concerned. for such an offence, prosecution has to prove that the accused "obtained" the valuable thing or pecuniary advantage by corrupt or illegal means or by otherwise abusing his position as a public servant and that too without the aid of the statutory presumption under section 4(1) of the act as it is available only in respect of offences under section 5(1)(a) and (b) -- and not under section 5(1)(c), (d) or (e) of the act. "obtain" means to secure or gain (something) as the result of request or effort (shorter oxford dictionary). in case of obtainment the initiative vests in the person who receives and in that context a demand or request from him will be a primary requisite for an offence under section 5(1)(d) of the act unlike an offence under section 161 ipc, which as noticed above can be, established by proof o either "acceptance" or "obtainment".11. same is the position of statutory presumption under section 20 of the act and is available for the offence punishable under section 7 or section 11 or clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13 and not for clause (d) of sub-section 13.12. in the background of aforesaid settled legal position, we would now refer to the relevant part of the evidence. before the trial court, it was submitted by the learned app that complainant has not supported the prosecution case on main ingredients of demand and acceptance and was treated hostile. in cross-examination also, he has not supported the prosecution version on demand or acceptance of the amount. the trial court has also observed that the complainant deliberately does not support on the points of demand and acceptance. however, the court relied upon the evidence of panch shailesh devshankar panda (pw2).we were taken through the evidence of pw2 pandaya and from his evidence. it is difficult to find out any statement made by him that accused demanded any amount from the complainant. the relevant part of the evidence of this witness suggests that when the prosecution party went at the police chowki accused asked the complainant as to why he had come there at that time? to that, replied that he was waiting since one o'clock and that he has brought one witness to be examined. accused informed him to come in the evening as his writer was not present. when the accused started to go towards toilet, the complainant followed him and he gave something from his pocket to the accused who took the same and put that in his pocket. from this evidence, it cannot be inferred that accused demanded any amount from the complainant or that he had obtained the same. it is apparent that the trial court and the high court misread the evidence of pw2 and held that there was demand by the accused and the amount was paid to him by the complainant. it was unreasonable to hold that accused demanded money from the complaint. complainant denied the said story and pw2 had not stated so.13. in this view of the matter, this appeal is partly allowed. impugned judgment and order passed by the high court confirming the order passed by the special judge, city civil court, ahmedabad convicting the appellant for the offence punishable under section 13(1)(d)(i) is set aside and the appellant is acquitted for the same.
n. santosh hegde, j.1. heard learned counsel.2. leave granted.3. the union of india and two others have challenged in this appeal an interim order made by the high court of delhi dated 30.7.2002 in c.m. no. 5084/2002 in c.w.p. no. 6611 of 2001. by the said order, while granting rule the high court made the impugned and hoc interim arrangement. by this, the high court directed the union of india and other respondents in the writ petition to issue a 'no. objection certificate' (noc) to the respondent herein subject to the respondent complying with the schedule of payment proposed in the impugned order.4. briefly stated, in the schedule of payment, the high court directed the respondent to pay to the customs authorities a sum of rs. 50 lacs per month for an initial period of 6 months, and thereafter a sum of rs. 70 lacs per mensem for a further period of 6 months. it also directed the writ petitioner to obtain certain letter of confirmation for m/s. air uk leasing ltd. (aul) confirming that a sum of rs. 12.5 crores paid by them could be appropriated towards the dues of the writ petitioner in payment of inland air travel tax.5. the writ petition before the high court was filed challenging an order made by the joint secretary in a revision application, who by the said order had upheld the order of the commissioner (appeals) who had, in turn, upheld the demand made by the union of india on the respondent for payment of inland air travel tax purportedly collected by the respondent from the passengers along with the interest and penalty statutorily payable for non-deposit of such tax within the time stipulated in the statute.6. as noted above, the writ petition is still pending consideration by the high court and the impugned order is made as an interim arrangement.7. learned attorney general appearing for the appellants, contended that the relief granted by the high court though interim in nature, is beyond the ambit of the writ petition itself, apart from being in the nature of a final relief. he contended that there are certain factual and legal issues which have been decided by the statutory authorities in their quasi-judicial status and unless and until the said findings are set aside by the high court, no relief in the nature of interim relief could have been granted by the high court. for example, he contends that the contention of the respondent that a sum of rs. 12.5 crores deposited by aul with the customs authorities for taking away the aircraft from india, could not have been treated as an amount adjustable towards the dues of the respondent. he submits that a contention to the contrary has been rejected by all the statutory authorities, therefore, this is an issue which could only be decided at the stage of final hearing. he also contended that aul is not a party to the proceedings before the high court and the so-called settlement which is referred to in the impugned order between aul and the respondent cannot be taken into consideration by the court in the writ proceedings. learned attorney general had a more serious objection in regard to the direction to grant of 'noc' which, according to the learned counsel, is a matter outside the pale of the writ petition, because what is in dispute in the writ petition is only the amount payable as inland air travel tax and not the right of the respondent to re-launch its airline operations, the latter being subject to many other conditions under the appropriate laws and by appropriate authorities, who are not parties to the writ petition. at any rate, the learned attorney general submits that such an interim direction in a writ petition challenging an order in revision is wholly alien to the subject-matter of the writ petition. learned attorney general also submits that even assuming that an order of this interim nature can be sustained for any reason, the respondent having defaulted in payment of the installments fixed by the high court, this court should vacate the interim order. he also submitted that because of the direction issued by the high court, coercive proceedings were initiated against the appellant and they were compelled to issue a conditional noc which he submits, be permitted to be withdrawn or be declared as ineffective.8. mr. a.b. saharya, learned senior counsel for the respondent, submitted that the impugned order in question was in fact made after negotiations between the parties and is almost a consent order, therefore, the appellant should not be permitted to go back on such consent order. on this ground alone, he contends that the appeal should be dismissed. he also contended that the sum of rs. 12.5 crores deposited by aul was towards the pending dispute in regard to the non payment of inland travel tax, therefore, aul having agreed to the appropriation of that amount by the customs authorities towards the alleged dues of the respondent towards the above tax, the department was bound to give due credit that too from the date on which the said amount was deposited with the customs authorities. he also contended that from an overall picture of the proceedings that took place in the high court on several dates, it would be clear that the impugned order was made in the interest of the parties concerned, therefore, it being an order in equity, this court should not interfere with the impugned order. at any rate, learned counsel contended that in this appeal some important questions arise for consideration which will have to be decided by this court before any interference with the impugned order which are as follows:1. whether or not the sum of rs. 12.5 crores paid in april, 1997 by aul in lieu of the restrained aircraft being taken out of india would itself satisfy the entire tax due as on from the date of the deposit i.e. april, 1997?2. whether interest @ 20% per annum would be payable to the appellant inspite of the deposit made by the aul of the 12.5 crores in april, 1997?3. whether levy of penalty can be justified in view of the above stated deposit by auk? and4. whether withholding of noc for resumption of airline operations on the ground of tax dues in justified when adequate security was given?9. having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the records, we think it is neither necessary nor advisable for us to answer these questions raised by the learned counsel in this appeal because these are questions which arise for consideration in the writ petition which is still pending before the high court. in this appeal, we are only concerned with the reasons given in the impugned order by the high court and our endeavour is to determine whether such reasoning could be the basis of an interlocutory order.10. mr. saharya, learned senior counsel, has also contended that the impugned order is made because of a settlement arrived by the parties concerned which is in the nature of a consent order and is also an order in equity therefore the same should not be interfered with.11. if either of these grounds is factually correct then we have no difficulty in agreeing with the high court but in regard to the factum of settlement between the parties, the parties are not at ad idem. learned attorney general has specifically denied this factual position and has stated that it is not a consent order or an order based on settlement but is an order made by the court at its discretion after hearing the parties. we also notice from a perusal of the impugned order it does not indicate that the said order is based on any settlement between the appellant and the respondent herein or on any consent or concession shown by the appellants herein. as a matter of fact, it is the case of the appellants that the respondent having collected the inland air travel tax (iatt) from the passengers as an agent of the government of india, has not deposited the said amount as required under the statute hence are not only liable to pay the said collected tax to the govt. of india but also liable to pay interest and penalty on such delayed payment. while the respondent contends that certain sums of money deposited by aul should be appropriated against the sum due from them and the said amount having been deposited in the year 1997 itself by aul, there is no liability on them to pay any further iatt. this is an issue which was raised before different forums like the assessing authority, commissioner of appeals and the revisional authority and all the three authorities have held against the respondent holding that the amount deposited by aul cannot be adjusted towards the tax due from the respondent, which still remains to be the bone of contention in the writ petition, it will be difficult to accept that the appellant would have accepted to treat the deposit made by the aul as available for adjustment towards the tax due from the respondents even for the purpose of an interim order. in the impugned order it seems the high court has recognised a settlement between aul and respondent, but the appellants are not parties to such settlement nor are they willing to associate themselves wit such settlement. if that be so, unless and until the high court decides the issue whether such settlement is binding on the appellant or not to seek adjustment of the said amount deposited by aul, we do not think it was proper for the high court to have taken note of this deposit by aul as being in favour of the respondent, while passing the impugned order.12. the next question for our consideration is whether the impugned order is an order in equity? learned attorney general submits that the tax in question was payable by the passengers who travelled in the respondent's aircrafts and the said tax has been collected by the respondent as an agent of the appellant and has not deposited the said amount as statutorily required but has appropriated the same for its own use and the finding of the 3 authorities is concurrently in favour of the appellants. in such a case granting an installment that too towards part of the amount due, can never be said to be an equitable order.13. mr. saharya, learned senior counsel for the respondent contended that since the high court has directed the respondents to deposit the amount of tax, which it thought was due to the appellants, though in installments the appellants interest is secured. and the further direction of the high court to issue the noc was only to facilitate the respondents to restart its airline operations denial of which was causing irreparable loss to the respondents. he submitted by the restarting of the airline operations even the appellant stood to gain because it would fetch more revenue to the appellant, hence, the impugned order is an equitable order.14. we find it difficult to accept the reasoning of learned counsel for the respondent that the order in question is an order in equity. for an order to be an order in equity, it should be equitable to all parties concerned. we do not think the impugned order has taken into consideration the interest of the revenue as was expected of the court entertaining an appeal against a money decree. the respondent herein according to the appellant collected the tax from the passengers which was payable to the union of india as an agent and did not deposit with the authorities concerned, on the contrary obviously used the same for its own use. its contention before the authorities that there was no default has been rejected by the said authorities. it is their further case that certain amount deposited by the aul with the customs authorities as a security for the purpose of taking back their aircraft to their country should be adjusted towards the respondent's dues, has also been negatived by all authorities. in such circumstances, entertaining a petition in its writ jurisdiction to grant a liberal installment to the respondent to pay the dues that too only a part of the dues, in our opinion, cannot be considered as an interim order made in equity. therefore, the order of the high court on the facts and circumstances of this case cannot be termed as an order in equity which ought not to be interfered with by this court.15. learned counsel for the respondent, however, contends that there is serious dispute as to the liability of the respondent to pay this tax because it alone is not the agent of the union of india in collecting such tax because many a times such tax is collected by the travel agents who themselves may be directly liable to the government of india to deposit the amount so collected by them. but this is an issue which is not yet decided by the high court, therefore, we do not think the impugned order is one such order which can be considered as an equitable order with which we should not interfere.16. nextly, we notice that the high court has granted a relief by way of an interim order which we think it could not have done at the interim stage for more than one reason. the writ petition in question was filed challenging an order made by the government in revision. the subject matter of the said petition pertains to the liability of the respondent to pay the tax. in the said writ petition, the respondent has sought an additional prayer by way of a direction to the respondent to grant a noc to re-launch its airline operations. we do not want to say at this state that such joinder of two separate causes of actions could be maintained in a writ petition like the one tat is filed before the high court by the respondent. it should be noticed that the authorities empowered to permit re-launching of the airline's operations were not before the court which we are told is the department of civil aviation. be that as it may, since the relief as termed in the writ petition being a final relief, we think the same could not have been granted by the high court at an interlocutory stage. but the learned counsel for the respondent contends that the said prayer is only an incidental prayer because the civil aviation authorities have refused to grant necessary permission to re-launch the airline's operations to the respondent only because the customs department which is a respondent before the high court, has refused to give noc therefore in effect what is sought for before the high court is only a direction to the customs authorities to issue a noc which in turn may be used by the respondent to obtain the required permission from the competent authorities to re-launch their airline operations. be that as it may, even accepting the argument of respondent, it is to be noticed that even a noc from the customs authorities can be directed to be issue by the high court only after it comes to the conclusion that the amount as determined by it has been paid by the respondent and not by an interim order otherwise it would amount to the granting of a final relief in favour of the respondent who has suffered adverse orders from the authorities below, even before the writ petition is finally decided, and in the event of the ultimate dismissal of the writ petition the respondent would gain an undue advantage inspite of its default and might even give rise to other questions in equity including rights of the third party.17. seen from any angle, we think the high court has erred in granting the impugned relief to the respondent which in our opinion is in the nature of a final relief which on facts and circumstances of this case, without deciding the issues involved in the writ petition, could not have been granted. therefore, we allow the appeal and set aside the impugned order. the noc which is said to have been issued provisionally stands revoked. payment made, if any, by the respondent would be given credit or adjusted in a manner considered appropriate by the high court in the pending writ petition.18. we have refrained from expressing any opinion on the submission urged before us by the appellants that in any event the respondents have committed default in payment of installments as directed by the high court in its impugned order and, therefore, in terms of the order itself, the order stands vacated.19. learned counsel for the respondents contends that in view of the pending dispute between the parties the respondent is suffering irreparable loss therefore we should request the high court to dispose of the pending writ petition at an early date. this is a matter which is best left to the discretion of the high court, hence, we do not propose to make any such request to the high court. we also make it clear that whatever views may have been expressed in this order, if any, are only tentative and meant for the disposal of this appeal only. we have not expressed any concluded opinion on the issues which may arise for consideration before the high court in the pending matters.20. the appeal is allowed accordingly.
prafulla c. pant, j.1. the dispute in the present matter pertains to a hundred year old building, which is covered under uttar pradesh urban buildings (regulation of letting, rent and eviction) act, 1972 (for short up act 13 of 1972"). section 13 of said act placed restriction on landlord, tenant and also on any other person from occupying the building in any capacity, without there being an order of release in favour of landlord, or order of allotment in case of tenant. the building in question is known as 7, dalibagh situated in lucknow. originally said property was owned by a barrister mohammad wasim and on his migration to pakistan, vested with the custodian of evacuee property, and thereafter settled in favour of rai bahadur lakshman das, a displaced person. but it appears that physical possession could not be delivered to the allottee as the building was in occupation of several tenants. it is pleaded that the appellant anil kalra, along with his brother, sister and two others, has stepped into the shoes of the landlords through dr. mulk raj, dwarika das and banarasi das, heirs of rai bahadur lakshman das by way of sale deeds executed in the years 1982-1983. it is alleged by the appellant that after the tenants vacated the premises, an application was moved under section 16(1)(b) of up act 13 of 1972 for release of the building for demolition and reconstruction before the competent authority (authorized additional district magistrate).2. the competent authority called for a report from rent control inspector, who inspected the spot and reported on 14.11.1984 that the office of cane commissioner (tenant on the part of the building) was in the midst of vacating the same. he further reported that as per information received, respondent no. 2 mrigendra pandey and respondent no. 3 nripendra pandey (both sons of dr. j.d. pandey), under the banner of m/s. swargiya sanjay gandhi sahkari avas samiti ltd.,, after breaking open the locks, had unauthorizedly occupied the building. it was further reported by the rent control inspector that the deputy cane commissioner had apprehended that the part vacated by him was also likely to be occupied by said society, and a first information report was lodged to that effect and the district magistrate, lucknow, was also informed about it. with the above information, the rent control inspector recommended that deemed vacancy be declared in respect of the building under section 12(1)(b) of up act 13 of 1972, and further reported that there was a case in favour of the landlord- appellant for getting released the building for the purpose of demolition and reconstruction. (co-landlords also joined anil kalra by moving separate application before the competent authority (additional district magistrate, city, lucknow). on perusal of the report of the rent control inspector and after inviting objections of concerned parties, vacancy was declared. thereafter, vide order dated 30.12.1986 (on application dated 25.2.1986), the competent authority issued the order for release of the building under section 16(1)(b) of up act 13 of 1972 in favour of the appellant and co-landlords. when after issuance of form-c unauthorized occupants failed to vacate the building, form-d was issued.3. the unauthorized occupants filed a review petition before the competent authority (additional district magistrate, city), but the same was dismissed with the finding that the occupants were transferees from swargiya sanjay gandhi sahkari avas samiti ltd., which has no title or authority to occupy the building. on this a rent revision was filed by respondent nos. 1 to 3 (dr. j.d. pandey and his two sons mrigendra pandey and nripendra pandey, both advocates). the revision was decided by v additional district judge, lucknow, vide order dated 28.10.1991, in favour of said respondents. the appellant and co-landlords filed the writ petition no. 183 (r/c) of 1991 before the high court of judicature at allahabad, lucknow bench, challenging the order passed by the revisional court. after hearing the parties, the writ petition was allowed by the high court, vide order dated 26.5.1999 with the direction that the proceedings for delivery of possession to the landlord shall be re-initiated from the stage they were stayed. the application for recall, filed by respondent nos. 1 to 3, was dismissed on 4.7.2002. that round of litigation attained finality with the dismissal of special leave petition (c) nos. 24659-60 of 2002 on 10.12.2002, by this court.4. in the above circumstances, the appellant moved application for execution of form-d before the rent control officer (additional district magistrate, city, east, lucknow), and on 22.2.2003 said authority issued direction for execution of form-d. it is alleged by the appellant that to frustrate the release order, respondent nos. 1 to 3 offered to give possession of thirteen rooms only, and got the eviction proceedings stalled against unauthorized occupants. this gave cause to the appellant to file contempt petition no. 265 of 2003 before the high court. in said proceeding also respondent nos. 1 to 3 expressed willingness to hand over possession of thirteen rooms only and not the building. the single judge, hearing the contempt petition, directed the rent control officer (additional district magistrate, city) to comply the order of the high court, passed in the writ petition, against which special leave petition (c) nos. 24659-60 of 2002 had been dismissed. respondent nos. 1 to 3 filed contempt appeal no. 51 of 2006 against the interim order dated 1.12.2006, passed by the judge hearing the contempt petition. the contempt appeal was dismissed as not maintainable. thereafter, the respondents filed special appeal (intra court appeal) no. 923 of 2006 before the high court. the appellant raised a preliminary objection that no special appeal is maintainable against the order of the judge hearing the contempt petition. however, the high court rejected the preliminary objection. hence, this appeal through special leave, before us. connected civil appeal nos. 5688-89 of 2007 are filed by respondent nos. 1 to 3 of the civil appeal no. 3763 of 2007 against the judgment and orders dated 1.12.2006 and 8.12.2006, passed by the high court in criminal miscellaneous case no. 265 of 2006 and contempt appeal no. 51 of 2006.5. mr. pradeep kant, learned senior counsel for the appellant, submitted that respondent nos. 1 to 3 cannot be allowed to frustrate the orders of the court passed in the first round of litigation, which attained finality with the dismissal of special leave petition (c) nos. 24659-60 of 2002. on the other hand, mr. dinesh kumar garg, learned counsel for the respondents and affected parties, submitted that the landlords are not entitled to the release of more than thirteen rooms vacated by the cane commissioner.6. however, the respondents failed to show that under what authority the building was being occupied by respondent nos. 1 to 3 and let out to various occupants in violation of section 11 of the up act 13 of 1972. section 11 reads as under:11. prohibition of letting without allotment order.-save as hereinafter provided, no person shall let any building except in pursuance of an allotment order issued under section 16.7. there is no allotment order issued in favour of any of the alleged occupants under section 16 of the up act 13 of 1972. it is not in dispute that the building is old and covered under sub-section (2) of section 2 of the uttar pradesh urban buildings (regulation of letting, rent and eviction) act, 1972, which was initially applicable to ten years old buildings as on 15.7.1972. by up act 28 of 1976 words "ten years" were substituted by "twenty years", and by up act no. 11 of 1988 "twenty years" were substituted with "forty years". as such, in any case the building was covered under the act and not exempted under any of the clauses mentioned in section 2 of the up act no. 13 of 1972.8. the expression "district magistrate" is defined in clause (c) of section 3 and includes an officer authorized by the district magistrate to exercise, perform and discharge all or any of his powers, functions and duties under the act. clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 12 of up act no. 13 of 1972 provides that a landlord or a tenant of a building shall be deemed to have ceased to occupy the building or a part thereof if he has allowed it to be occupied by any person who is not a member of his family. section 13 of the act provides that where a landlord or tenant ceases to occupy a building or part thereof, no person shall occupy it in any capacity on his behalf of otherwise than under an order of allotment or release under section 16. clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 16 provides that the district magistrate may by an order release the whole or any part of the vacant building in favour of the landlord.9. in firm ganpat ram rajkumar v. kalu ram and ors. manu/sc/0181/1989manu/sc/0181/1989 : 1989 supp (2) scc 418, this court, commenting on the conduct of the occupants on behalf of the firm, in a case under haryana urban (control of rent and eviction) act, 1973, has observed as under:5. in the aforesaid view of the matter, the question that requires consideration is how will this order of eviction passed by the high court and confirmed by this court by dismissing the special leave petition on the terms mentioned hereinbefore on 24-8-1987 is to be enforced or implemented? in our opinion, the said order must be implemented and cannot be allowed to be defeated by the dubious methods adopted by the partners of the said firm of ganpat ram rajkumar. the whole conduct betrays a calculated attempt to defeat the order of this court and to mislead this court. if that is the position, in our opinion, parties cannot be allowed to do so and get away by misleading this court....10. in zahurul islam v. abul kalam and ors. 1995 supp (1) scc 464, after a decree of eviction passed by the competent court, a miscellaneous judicial case was filed before the second court of the assistant district judge, alipore, west bengal on the basis of forged rent receipts to get the execution proceedings stalled. commenting on the conduct of the tenant, in said case this court made following observations:11. after considering the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties and the affidavits filed by respondent 6, m/s. hind barrel company and respondents 13 to 15, it appears to us that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the petitioner is entitled to a direction from this court that the decree should be executed immediately by the executing court and delivery of the entirety of the suit premises covered by the decree under execution, should be delivered to the decree-holder, the petitioner, zahurul islam, by the executing court by evicting respondent 1, abul kalam and the other respondents including respondents 6 and 13 to 15 and any other person in possession of any portion of the disputed premises, if necessary, with the police help....11. in gayatri devi and ors. v. shashi pal singh manu/sc/0188/2005manu/sc/0188/2005 : (2005) 5 scc 527, in a case initiated under delhi rent control act challenging eviction decree, this court expressed its concern in following words:13. the history of this litigation shows nothing but cussedness and lack of bona fides on the part of the respondent. apart from his tenacity and determination to prevent the appellants from enjoying the fruits of the decree, there appears to be nothing commendable in the case. even before us the same arguments of fraud, and that the appellants were not legally owners of the suit property, were pleaded.xxx18. considering that the respondent has deliberately delayed the execution, the executing court shall dispose of the execution proceedings with utmost dispatch.12. in m. meeramytheen and ors. v. k. parameswaran pillai and ors. manu/sc/1750/2009manu/sc/1750/2009 : (2010) 15 scc 359, considering the delay made by tenants in vacating the premises after orders passed under kerala buildings (lease and rent control) act, 1965, by getting inducted sub-tenant, this court issued following directions:14. the executing court will see that delivery of possession is effected within a period of fifteen days from the date of filing of the execution petition or the application aforementioned. in case for delivery of possession any armed force is necessary, the same shall be deputed by the superintendent of police within forty-eight hours from the date requisition is received therefor. it is also directed that in case anybody else, other than the tenants, is found in possession, he shall also be dispossessed from the premises in question.13. in atma ram builders private ltd. v. a.k. tuli and ors. manu/sc/0604/2011manu/sc/0604/2011 : (2011) 6 scc 385, deprecating the conduct of the tenant after the first round of litigation was over by getting inducted another person, this court expressed its anguish as under:4. it is deeply regrettable that in our country often litigations between the landlord and the tenant are fought up to the stage of the supreme court and when the tenant loses in this court then he starts a second innings through someone claiming to be a co-tenant or as a sub-tenant or in some other capacity and in the second round of litigation the matter remains pending for years and the landlord cannot get possession despite the order of this court. the time has come that this malpractice must now be stopped effectively.14. in view of law laid down by this court, as above, and considering the facts and circumstances of the present case, and conduct of respondents whereby persons in large number inducted unauthorisedly by them without any allotment order, civil appeal no. 3763 of 2007, filed by the landlord, deserves to be allowed, and civil appeal nos. 5688-89 of 2007, filed by the respondents (contemnors before the single judge of the high court) are liable to be dismissed. we order accordingly. we further direct the competent authority (additional district magistrate, city, east, lucknow) to execute the form-d. however, keeping in mind that there are several occupants (inducted unauthorisedly without any allotment order), on humanitarian ground they are allowed three months' time from today to vacate the premises voluntarily, whereafter they or anyone occupying in their place along with respondent nos. 1 to 3 in civil appeal no. 3763 of 2007, shall be forcibly dispossessed within 48 hours in compliance of this order, as directed above. the district magistrate and the senior superintendent of police, lucknow, are directed to provide every assistance in execution of the order of release, affirmed by the high court in writ petition (r/c) no. 183 of 1991 on 26.5.1999. needless to say that this court has already dismissed special leave petition (c) nos. 24659-60 of 2002 on 10.12.2002, challenging the order passed in the writ petition by the high court. we also clarify that the landlords are not allowed to let out the released building (in the existing condition), and they shall demolish the building for reconstruction for which the building has been released by the authority concerned.15. with the directions, as above, civil appeal no. 3763 of 2007 is allowed and civil appeal nos. 5688-89 of 2007 stand dismissed. there shall be no order as to costs.
u.u. lalit, j.1. writ petition (civil) no. 404 of 2008 has been filed in public interest seeking to highlight failure on part of state of orissa in deploying adequate police force to maintain law and order in kandhamal district of orissa and in protecting innocent people whose human rights were violated after the unfortunate assassination of swami laxmanananda saraswati and others on 23.08.2008 by some maoists. writ petition (civil) nos. 76 of 2009, 396 of 2009 and writ petition (criminal) no. 126 of 2012 also highlight the same issues. all these petitions inter alia pray for directions to the concerned authorities to provide proper and adequate facilities in refugee camps, to prevent communal violence, to provide adequate compensation to the victims of such communal violence, to order institution of commission of inquiry by a serving or a retired judge, to order investigation into the crimes committed during such violence by central bureau of investigation ("cbi" for short) and to set up special courts to deal with and try the offences committed during such violence. these petitions were heard together with writ petition (civil) no. 404 of 2008 as the lead matter.2. the incident and circumstances that led to the unrest and communal violence were dealt with in the report of the investigating team of the national human rights commission (hereinafter referred to as the "nhrc"), certain portions of which for the sake of facility are reproduced hereunder:on 23.08.2008 at 19.55 hrs. when swami laxmanananda saraswati was in his room, some armed men attacked his jalespetta ashram. two of them took control of the four unarmed recruits standing outside the ashram at gun point. the rest of them entered the ashram and started indiscriminate firing killing swami laxmanananda saraswati in the attached toilet of his room where he tried to hide himself. mata bhakti mai and kishore baba were killed in the adjoining room. simultaneously, some of them went into the room of the personal security officer (pso) who was not present that day and killed swami amrita nand and local villager puranjan who were lying in that room. the attackers fired about 50 rounds in fifteen minutes and ran away from the ashram. in this regard fir no. 37/08 under section 147/148/149/452/302/120-b/indian penal code, ps-tumdibandh was registered on the statement of the eyewitness brahmachari madhab baba...........................................the violence in the present case started after the death of the vishwa hindu parishad leader swami laxmanananda saraswati allegedly by the christians supported by the naxalites. the violence spread after the procession of the dead body of swami laxmananana saraswati was taken through various parts of the district on a grand scale. although the large scale violence started after his death, the cracks within the society were already existing as is evident from the data regarding clashes between these communities in the previous years (ref report of sp kandhamal at p-911-913 of annexure-ii). this is also evident from the fact that litigations between both the communities are existing on the issue of reservation for the sc (pano) christians.3. writ petition no. 404 of 2008 filed on 02.09.2008, came up before this court on 03.09.2008. this court thereafter passed various orders from time to time to ensure that the situation was brought under control and relief in full measure was extended to the victims. following were the orders passed by this court:a. 3.09.2008issue notice.learned addl. sol. general/counsel for respondents appear and accepts notice.the first respondent through its chief secretary is directed to file its response by way of an affidavit by tomorrow morning as to what steps are being taken to protect the life and property of the affected people in the state and also regarding the proposed yatra on ensuing friday.the secretary general is directed to send a copy of this order through telegram/fax to the chief secretary, state of orissa immediately.list the matter on 4.9.2008 at 2.00 p.m.b. 4.09.2008heard learned senior counsel for the petitioner, learned additional solicitor general and learned senior counsel appearing for the state.pursuant to our directions, chief secretary of the state of orissa has sworn an affidavit given all the details taken place in the state of orissa to control the violence erupted recently. in the affidavit, it is stated that all possible steps have been taken by the government especially in the kandhamal district. it is stated that there are 17 police stations in the district and in all these police stations necessary officers have been deployed and the service of the crpf, reserved armed forces (raf) have also been obtained and deployed. 15 companies of crpf, 24 platoons of orissa state armed police (osap) and in addition to the district s.p. and other officers has taken adequate steps and has given security to those people visiting as well as for protection of others would be provided. it is also stated, the state will take all possible steps to maintain law and order in the event of any proposed yatra by any one whatsoever. the state government has been dealing with all the situations firmly and even handedly and will continue to do so.learned additional solicitor general submitted that yesterday the union home minister visited the state of orissa and even in some of the relief camps and satisfied with the service and they are properly operated. but it is submitted that still tension prevails in the state and adequate crpf force has already been deployed to help the state police to maintain the law and order situation and learned senior counsel appearing for the state of orissa requested that in view of the tension four more new battalions would be required in the state and learned additional solicitor general submits that urgent steps would be taken to deploy the required force.as regards the proposed yatra to be organized by the section of the people, it is submitted all possible steps would be taken to prevent any yatra being held and police and other para military forces to make possible steps to prevent any untoward incident being taken place. section 144 has already been imposed in the state in all the districts where tension prevails.learned counsel for the petitioner stated that even yesterday night some of the houses were burnt out in tikabali and daringabadi villages. learned counsel appearing for the state submitted that so far no such information has been received by them and the matter would be enquired into and urgent steps would be taken in these areas also to prevent any breach of law and order situation.we hope the state police along with crpf and other para military forces would ensure the law and order situation and people's life and property will be protected to best of their ability. the state government would also take urgent steps to see that those who are in the relief camps are protected and no miscreants shall be allowed to visit the camps to create any problem.......c. 22.10.2008on 4.9.2008, this court had passed an order and expected that the state government of orissa would take all possible steps to control the violence that had been happening at the state of orissa after the unfortunate killing of swami laxmanananda on 23.08.2008. we are told by the counsel for the petitioner that even after the incident, it was alleged that about 906 houses had been destroyed and about 19 churches have been partly damaged/burnt and 21 persons have been killed, including two policemen, and some incidents of rape have also occurred. in the additional affidavit the petitioner has alleged that large number of persons are in the relief camps. he further contended that the workers of the non-governmental organizations are not being allowed to meet the persons in the relief camps or to render help to them. the petitioner is also aggrieved by the stand taken by the state in not giving any compensation to the churches which had been destroyed/damaged by the miscreants. as regards one victim who had been allegedly raped, the petitioner wants that the investigation should be handed over to the cbi.heard learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner, the state and learned additional solicitor general for the union of india. the principal secretary, home department of the state of orissa has filed a detailed additional affidavit dated 17.10.2008 wherein it was stated that enough policemen had been deployed in the area and the learned senior counsel for the state highlighted all the details that were given in the counter affidavit. it is also stated by the learned counsel that, apart from these police forces, there are also additional police and paramilitary personnel, sent by the government of india who were allowed to be in the state, be allowed to continue at least till the end of december, 2008, i.e. till the festival season is over.as regards the alleged rape, it is stated that nine accused have so far been arrested by the police and the victim is not cooperating with the police for having the test identification parade.....................................................as the accused have already been arrested, we do not think that at this stage, the further investigation should be handed over to the cbi. in the interest of victim and all others, we wish that the victim would cooperate with the state police for the further investigation of the case.learned senior counsel appearing for the state submitted that the relief camps are working well and all such details have been stated in the affidavit filed by the home secretary. we make it clear that any member of the ngo can associate in the committee coordinating the relief work in the relief camps. sufficient security also be provided by the state in the relief camps.the state is also agreed to give compensation to the victims. it is stated in the affidavit of the state that rs. 50,000/- is being given for the fully damaged house, rs. 25,000/- for partly damaged house and rs. 2 lacs each is being given to the damaged public institutions like schools, hospitals, etc. and rs. 2 lacs each from the chief minister's relief fund to each of the families of the persons killed in the violence. the petitioner has prayed that the churches which are being destroyed or partly damaged should also be given their financial assistance. learned counsel appearing for the state submitted that the state has taken a policy that religious or worship place of any religion is not being given any financial assistance though several institutions working under these religion are being given. we are told by the counsel for the petitioner that approximately 16 churches have been fully or partly damaged. as regards the damaged churches also the state can have a generous attitude on the matter and assess the damage of those churches or other religious places and render reasonable help to rebuilt the same. we hope that the state could create an atmosphere where there shall be complete harmony between the groups of people and the state shall endeavour to have discussions with the various groups and bring about peace and do all possible help to the victims. the existing battalions/police force sent by the government of india would continue till the end of december, 2008.the state has also submitted that fast track courts are established to clear the oases arising out of these incidents.....d. 5.01.2009this court by an order passed on 22.10.2008 indicated that sufficient paramilitary forces be deployed in the state of orissa till december, 2008. learned counsel for the state submits that still these forces are required in the state to maintain the law and order situation even if removal of group of battalion is necessary the same should be done in a phased manner. we make it clear that the state government may have discussions with the home secretary of the home ministry and take an appropriate decision having regard to the law and order situation prevailing in the state for protection of minorities in the state.the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner stated that large number of churches have been demolished and the state government is giving meager amount by way of compensation. some churches and religious places were, in existence which are being destroyed and the state government is not giving any compensation on the ground that there is some dispute regarding the land. the government may formulate a scheme regarding these religious places and take appropriate decision.......e. 13.04.2009heard learned counsel for the petitioners.it is alleged by the petitioner that large number of houses were either destroyed or partially damaged and in some cases compensation has been given to the owners of these houses. it is also alleged by the petitioners that nearly 183 churches have been partially damaged and compensations have been paid only in respect of five churches. the petitioners also states that about 93 persons have died in the various incidents but, according to an estimate of the state, only 32 persons have died and the compensations have not been given to the dependents of these persons, who died. the petitioners also allege that large scale unemployed person are waiting for the work under the nrega scheme and the cards are not provided to them. it is also alleged that so many persons have lost their ration cards and they required fresh ration cards to get the articles under the public supply system. the petitioners have given some details i.e. name, village and other details regarding the individuals.leaned counsel appearing for the state of orissa seeks time to inquire into the details of these facts given by the petitioners and the learned counsel seeks time to furnish the details regarding the steps already taken by it. it is stated that a committee has also been constituted to give relief to the affected persons. the correctness of these details would be enquired into by the state and a detailed report be furnished to this court within a period of four weeks. it is also submitted that the state is taking steps to see that all the persons who are in the relief camps exercise their franchise in the ensuing general election and steps are being taken to take them to the polling booths on the date of polling under the protection of the police. learned addl. solicitor general of india submits that a sum of rs. 3 lacs each is proposed to be given to the dependents of the persons who have died and as soon as the details are available from the state the amount would be made available to the state.in the meanwhile, the relief works, which are already in progress, may be continued......f. 11.05.2009heard learned senior counsel for the petitioner and also learned counsel for the state.it is pointed out by learned counsel for the petitioners that in some of the cases where the houses have been destroyed and damaged, full compensation has not been paid. it is also submitted that all the dependents of the deceased persons have not received compensation.on the other hand, learned senior counsel appearing for the state of orissa submitted that it has been assessed that about 4,588 houses spread over in 8 blocks suffered damage and steps are being taken to pay compensation. it is pointed out that in these 8 blocks one i.a.s. officer each has been deputed to look after the rehabilitation measures and it is also stated that in some of the cases first installment has been paid and in some cases second installment has been paid and in some other cases third installment has also been paid. it is pointed out by learned counsel for the petitioners that in the case of 917 families, first installment has not been paid but it is disputed by learned counsel for the state. the state may pursue the disbursement of compensation to these families.it is submitted by counsel for the state that in the case of 42 deaths which have taken place, dependents/legal heirs of the deceased have been paid compensation by the state of upto rs. 2 lacs and rs. 3 lacs has to be paid by the union of india and the list has already been sent by the state but learned additional solicitor general submits that only 33 cases have been recommended by the state and out of them 30 have been paid compensation and the rest of the three have been rejected. as regards the rest, the state may send its recommendations to the central government and as soon as the same are received by the central government, it may take appropriate action and the compensation shall be disbursed at the earliest...........4. the monitoring by this court through interim orders passed from time to time and the efforts on part of the state government to control and remedy the situation and provide relief to the victims having yielded results, according to the petitioner in the lead matter, most of the issues and grievances highlighted in the petition, now stand addressed. according to the petitioner what remains to be considered are prayers d, g and h in writ petition no. 404 of 2008 which are set out hereunder:d. issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ order or direction, directing the state of orissa to forthwith pay compensation to all those families whose houses have been fully damaged @ of rs. 4 lakhs per family and rs. 2 lakhs per family for partial damage and rs. 5 lakhs for every family where death has taken place and rs. 1 lakh for every family where injuries have taken place.g. issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ order or direction, directing the respondents to constitute and appoint an independent commission for the framing of the rehabilitation and compensation scheme and to assess the quantum of damage, extent of damage, methodology of assessment and for proportionate allocation of funds in the affected areas.h. issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ order or direction, directing the respondent state to pay all the victims of communal violence full compensation for all the loss incurred at actual market value proportionate to their loss.5. it may be noted at this stage that during the pendency of these matters, an investigating team of nhrc visited the areas in question and submitted its report. the relevant portions of their report are to the following effect:10.3.11. it is evident that more forces were sent as and when the violence started spreading to different areas of kandhamal. had the forces arrived in sufficient strength in the initial stage itself, the violence and the number of deaths could have been controlled. as far as the contingency plans are concerned, it seems that it was not properly formulated in the district. in december, 2007, the deployment was issued by the district sp in the form of a small wireless signal instead of a detailed order whereas the danger of communal violence was imminent. the district authorities took measures to control the violence after 23.08.2008. additional deployments were made. firs were lodged promptly and arrests were made. a total number of 732 firs were lodged and 597 arrests were made till 17.11.2008. out of the arrests made 259 number of arrests were of persons against whom firs were lodged by name. relief camps were also provided with armed guards and patrolling was being done. despite all the effort, the force strength was not to the extent that all the migrants could be provided with security in their own villages. a total of 38 number of companies of the crpf, seven platoons of the osap and seven sections of apr, have been deployed in kandhamal so far..........................................................10.4.6. there is no evidence regarding the police conniving with the perpetrators of violence and allowing the fundamentalists to attack the christian community. the details of cases registered against the perpetrators of violence and the details of persons arrested is available in pages 545-805 of annexure-i...............................................................10.8. the relief camps have been well established by the district authorities. the size of the relief camps are very large this time. thousands of people have taken shelter in each of these camps. relief work, however, was going on in full swing and basic requirements of food, clothing shelter and medicines were being met. the inhabitants of the camps did not complain regarding any shortcoming in the relief operations. all the relief camps are guarded with armed guard. compensation has been provided to those killed in the recent violence at the rate of rs. two lacs from cm relief fund. (ref. page 983-985 annexure-ii). in some cases recommendation of grant of compensation of rs. 3 lacs has been sent to the central govt. (ref. page 983-985 annexure-ii). the investigation team also observed that efforts were being made by the district authorities to carry out a census of children in these camps and provide them education in the camps itself. doctors were found attending the patients in these camps. there was also a stock of medicines in these camps.6. the report of the nhrc also included a status report on "relief, rehabilitation and reconciliation measures taken up by the district administration, kandhamal" which was submitted to nhrc on 14.1.2011. chapter iii of that status report deals with rehabilitation and reconciliation efforts under following heads:(i) assistance to next of kins of dead persons.(ii) house building assistance(iii) financial assistance to religious institutions(iv) assistance to damaged shop/shop-cum-residence(v) financial assistance to public institutions(vi) assistance to the children of victims of communal, ethnic or terrorist violence.(vii) financial assistance to shg centres(viii) special steps for rehabilitation of affected families.(ix) administration of justice(x) strengthening of policing infrastructure in district(xi) dialogue and peace committees........(xii) theatre, drama, music.....for peace.for the present purposes, we may quote items (ix) and (x) which were as under:(ix) administration of justicegovernment has taken following steps for ensuring justice to the victims of violence:a) state government has constituted a commission of inquiry consisting of shri justice s.c. mohapatra, a retired judge to enquire into various matters relating to killing of swami laxmanananda saraswati and others and incidents of violence in its aftermath.b) in order to speed up investigation process in aftermath of the communal/ethnic violence, a special investigation team was constituted by the state government to investigate the cases related to communal/ethnic violence in the district. because of the efforts of this team, investigation have been completed in 790 cases out of total number of 828 cases registered in various police stations with respect to communal/ethnic violence in the district in 2008. the detailed status of cases related to communal/ethnic violence is given in annexure-9.c) two fast track courts have been constituted to ensure speedy disposal of cases related to communal/ethnic violence in the district. government of orissa has also appointed special public prosecutor to deal with such cases in an effective and efficient manner.(x) strengthening of policing infrastructure in district:state government has taken a number of steps for strengthening and streamlining policing in the district. steps taken include:(1) new police station has been created at chakapad with sanctioned strength of inspector of police (01), sub-inspector of police(02), assistant sub-inspector of police(02), havildar(01), constable (10) and assistant driver(01).(2) k. nuagam out-post has been upgraded to a police station with additional sanctioned posts of inspector of police(01), sub-inspector of police(02), assistant sub-inspector of police(01), constable(04) & assistant driver(01).(3) as police station areas of g. udayagiri, raikia, tikabali & chakapad were some of the worst affected areas during the communal/ethnic violence in 2008, office of the sub-divisional police officer (sdpo) has been created at g. udayagiri for better coordination and immediate response to any such situation in future.(4) one post of additional superintendent of police, kandhamal has been created for assisting superintendent of police, kandhamal in management of law and order.(5) one post of reserve inspector (general) has been created in office of the superintendent of police, kandhamal.(6) 40 posts of constables have been upgraded to assistant sub-inspector of police.(7) the state government has sanctioned 750 posts of special police officer (spo) for the district.(8) physical infrastructure has been strengthened by way of building 100 men barracks in each of the police station in the district. this allows positioning of crpf, osap, ossf and other such special police forces, within the campus of police station, which results in better coordination and immediate response to any law and order situation.7. the last affidavit on record filed on behalf of the state of orissa on 01.03.2016 sets out in detail the steps taken by the state and the present status. paragraphs 3 to 8 of said affidavit are as under:3. that it is humbly submitted that during kandhamal riots 2008, 827 firs were received and registered and have been duly investigated into. two fast track courts have been established to ensure speedy disposal of the cases relating to communal/ethnic violence in the district. special public prosecutors have also been engaged to deal with such cases in an effective and efficient manner. the current status of the cases are given below:4. that it is humbly submitted that during kandhamal riots 2008, relief camps were set up at tikabali, g. udayagiri, raikia, k. nuagaon, baliguda, daringibari, phulbani and phiringia to provide immediate relief to the victims of violence. all efforts were taken for safe return of camp inmates to their villages. as result of which all relief camps are closed now and the last relief camp was closed on 25.08.2009.5. that it is respectfully submitted that 39 persons had died in group clashes during kandhamal violence, 2008. in all these case ex-gratia @ rs. 2.00 lakhs has been paid to the next-of-kins of such victims out of the chief minister's relief fund (cmrf). similarly, central assistance @ rs. 3.00 lakhs to the next-of-kins of the victims have been disbursed to the noks of 39 deceases persons. not a single case of reported death during kandhamal violence is pending for sanction of ex-gratia compensation.6. that it is further respectfully submitted that a total number of 4822 houses have been affected which includes 3316 partially damaged and 1506 fully damaged houses. house building assistance (hba) @ rs. 50,000/- each for fully damaged house, rs. 20,000/- each for partially damaged houses have been provided out of the chief minister's relief fund. in addition to this financial assistance @ rs. 20,000/- for each fully damaged house and rs. 10,000/- for each partially damaged house have been provided by the government of india.7. that it is also humbly submitted that 232 religious institutions were damaged during the violence. out of which 7 are big churches, and 225 are small churches/prayer houses. financial assistance of rs. 2 lakhs each to number of severely damaged big churches and rs. 1 lakh each to 5 numbers of partly damaged big churches were disbursed. similarly, rs. 50,000/- each to 35 numbers of fully damaged small churches/prayer houses, rs. 20,000/- each to 63 numbers of severely damaged small churches/prayer houses and rs. 10,000/- each to 127 numbers of partly damages small churches/prayer houses were disbursed.8. that it is humbly submitted that 119 number of shops/shop-cum-residence were damaged. depending on extent of damage a total amount of rs. 19,45,000/- was disbursed to 119 shops/shop-cum-residence. similarly, rs. 6,30,000/- out of chief minister's relief fund and rs. 12,00,000 out of prime minister's relief fund were disbursed to 12 number of public institutions which were damaged during violence. rs. 1,30,000/- was also given to 4 number of damaged self-help group (shg) centers.8. in written submissions filed on 03.03.2016 on behalf of the petitioner in the lead matter, the facts asserted in the affidavit dated 01.03.2016 are not contested but what is stressed is that out of 512 charge-sheets submitted, trials have been completed only in 362 which resulted in conviction in 78 cases while 284 cases ended in acquittal and only 15 appeals have been filed.9. while dealing with cases concerning communal violence that occurred in and around muzaffarnagar in state of uttar pradesh in september 2013, this court in its judgment rendered on 26.03.2014 in mohd. haroon and ors. v. union of india and anr. manu/sc/0226/2014manu/sc/0226/2014 : (2014)5 scc 252 had dealt with financial assistance given to the families of the deceased and injured persons, the relevant paragraphs being:49. according to letter no. 1027k/chh-sa.ni.pr.-13/15(14)2013 dated 10-9-2013 and government order no. f.a.-2-367/ten-92-100(30)d/92-home police, section-12 dated 21-12-1992, financial assistance to the families of deceased and injured persons is to be given at the following rates:56. the government of india has also sanctioned ex gratia relief from the prime minister's relief fund at the rate of rs. 2 lakhs per family for the dependants or legal heirs of the deceased and at the rate of rs. 50,000 for the seriously injured persons.............paragraph 71 of the decision discloses that the state granted further compensation of rs. 300,000/- taking the total compensation in cases of death during communal violence to the extent of rs. 15,00,000/-.10. it is true that the incidents of communal violence had occurred in and around muzaffarnagar in the year 2013 and that the state itself had decided to pay compensation in the scale as mentioned above. we have considered the scales at which compensation has been granted and disbursed in the present matter. in our view the ends of justice would be met if the state government and the central government are directed to pay additional compensations as set out in the chart below. the compensation suggested in writ petition no. 404 of 2008 as against each of the categories is set out in column no. 2 while column no. 3 gives the figures of compensation already granted and disbursed. in our view, the additional compensation as detailed in column no. 4 ought to be paid to the victims or their family which will provide solace and succor. it is ordered accordingly.11. the report of the investigating team of the nhrc as stated above, does show that though adequate forces were deployed and sent as the violence started spreading, the forces could have arrived in sufficient strength at the initial stage itself. if there were incidents of unrest in the past, the state ought to have been more vigilant. the nhrc team has found that there was no evidence regarding the police conniving with the perpetrators of violence. further, immediate steps were certainly taken, in that relief camps were set up and strength of police contingents were increased.paragraphs ix and x of the status report submitted by the district administration to the nhrc on 14.01.2011 show the concern of the state government under respective heads. the state government shall do well to enquire into and find the causes for such communal unrest and strengthen the fabric of the society. strengthening of police infrastructure in the district as detailed in paragraph 10 of that status report will undoubtedly help in curbing any re-occurrence of such communal violence but at the same time peace building measures must also be undertaken.12. in mohd. haroon (supra), 6 months after the violence had occurred, this court found it difficult to direct that investigation be handed over to any agency other than the state. paragraph 115 of the judgment sums up the discussion on this issue in following words:115. at this juncture viz. after a period of six months, whether an agency other than the state is to be directed to investigate and take appropriate steps. we have already noted various circumstances under which the court can entrust investigation to agency other than the state such as sit or cbi. we have to keep in mind, as observed by the constitution bench1 referred to supra, that no inflexible guidelines can be laid down to decide whether or not such power should be exercised. however, this court reiterated that such order is not to be passed as a matter of routine or merely because a party has levelled some allegations against the state police. in other words, this extraordinary power must be exercised sparingly, cautiously and in exceptional situations where it becomes necessary to provide credibility or instil confidence in investigation or where such an order may be necessary for doing complete justice in enforcing the fundamental rights. apart from this, immediately after the occurrence, writ petition (crl.) no. 155 of 2013 came to be filed in this court even in the first week of september, 2013. pursuant to the same, this court, after taking note of the importance of the issues viz. many people lost their lives and properties, sufferings of both communities and children, issued various directions to the state and the central government. we have already extracted those orders in the earlier part of our judgment.13. in the present case, the order dated 22.10.2008 discloses that this court did not think that further investigation be handed over to the cbi. at this length of time, when final form has been submitted in all 827 cases of communal violence which were registered, it would not be proper to direct that the investigation and consequential steps be entrusted to the cbi. we, therefore, reject such prayer made in the connected petitions. the request for setting up of special courts to deal with and try the offence committed during such violence, already stands granted as the state has set up two special courts.14. the affidavit filed on behalf of the state on 01.03.2013 discloses that out of 827 registered cases, 512 cases resulted in filing of charge-sheets while in 315 cases final reports were submitted. in other words, in 315 cases either no offence was found to have been made out or the offenders could not be detected. such large proportion is quite disturbing. the state could do well in looking into all these 315 cases and see that the offenders are brought to book. similarly, out of 362 trials which stand completed only 78 have resulted in conviction, which again is a matter of concern. the concerned authorities must see to it that the matters are taken up wherever acquittals were not justified on facts.15. finally, we must remind ourselves of the observations of this court in ahmedabad st. xavier's college society and anr. v. state of gujarat and anr. manu/sc/0088/1974manu/sc/0088/1974 : air 1974 sc 1389 : 1974(1) scc 717, though made in the context of rights of minorities to set up and administer institutions for imparting education, are quite apt even in the present context:.....the minorities are as much children of the soil as the majority and the approach has been to ensure that nothing should be done, as might deprive the minorities of a sense of belonging, of a feeling of security, of a consciousness of equality and of the awareness that the conservation of their religion, culture, language and script as also the protection of their educational institutions is a fundamental right enshrined in the constitution.... it can, indeed, be said to be an index of the level of civilization and catholicity of a nation as to how far their minorities feel secure and are not subject to any discrimination or suppression.16. with the directions as stated above, these petitions are disposed of.1state of w.b. v. committee for protection of democratic rights manu/sc/0121/2010manu/sc/0121/2010 : (2010) 3 scc 571
civil appeal @ s.l.p.(c) no. 25757/20101. leave granted. this appeal is directed against the common impugned judgment and order dated 2.03.2010 passed by the division bench of the high court of gujarat at ahmedabad in dismissing first appeal no. 340 of 1990 filed by the appellant herein by affirming the judgment and decree of the trial court wherein the trial court has scaled down the decretal amount of ` 43,86,974.98 passed by the commissioner for taking accounts for the high court and city civil court and awarded ` 18,83,914.88 after adjusting the admitted amount of ` 16,820.12 out of ` 19,00,735.00 and held that the appellant is entitled for a sum of rs. 18,83,914.88 with interest at the rate of 10 per cent per annum.2. the scaling down of the amount from the decree passed by the commissioner for taking accounts for the high court and city civil court, ahmedabad dated 18.01.1989 as per schedule-'e', was questioned before the city civil court by the appellant, urging various legal contentions. the respondent sought for dismissal of the civil suit for recovery of the said amount by the appellant herein.3. both the appellant and the respondent filed first appeal before the high court. insofar as the appellant is concerned, he requested to modify the judgment and set aside that portion of the judgment of the city civil court by scaling down the amount as the same is contrary to the evidence on record and findings recorded by the high court is erroneous on the contentious issue, even though it has accepted the findings recorded with regard to non-production of documents as directed by the trial court which are in custody and possession of the respondent in relation to the accounts maintained by it with regard to the transactions which had taken place for the period for which the claim was preferred, namely, rendering account of overriding commission from 1.12.1971 to 5.08.1974 and despite direction the preliminary ' decree passed by the trial court was challenged before the high court in the earlier round of litigation by filing first appeal nos. 640 of 1981 and 641 of 1981 with cross-objections. the high court vide its oral judgment dated 19.02.1985 while affirming the preliminary judgment and decree as per exhibits 182 and 183, the directions (a) to (e) contained in the judgment, particularly the direction to the respondent (defendant) to render account of overriding commission from 1.12.1971 to 5.08.1974 was disobeyed, therefore, the finding was recorded by the commissioner while computing the claim by drawing an adverse inference and the commissioner decreed the amount of ` 43,86,974.98 after adjusting the claim of the defendant.4. that preliminary decree was challenged before the high court in first appeal nos. 640 of 1981 and 641 of 1981 on various grounds. the high court has heard the learned counsel for the parties. the appeal of the original plaintiff-appellant herein is partly allowed with regard to the direction pertaining to accounts directing the respondent to render account w.e.f. 1.01.1968 instead of 1.12.1971. with the modification, as stated above, the direction would be read as: "the defendant-respondent herein to render account of overriding commission from 1.01.1968 to 5.08.1974". rest of the judgment and decree passed by the trial court is not disturbed. first appeal no. 641 of 1981 in respect of the claim against the appellant was dismissed. thereafter, the respondent did not comply with the direction contained in the impugned judgment regarding production of the statement of accounts for the period 1.1.1968 to 5.08.1974. thereafter, the commissioner for taking accounts on the basis of the material available on record has allowed the claim for a sum of ` 43,86,974.98 after adjusting the claim of the defendant by recording its reasons. the correctness of the same was questioned before the high court by the respondent herein. the high court while accepting the findings and reasons recorded in the preliminary decree has disallowed certain amounts by reappreciating the evidence placed on record by the appellant and his witnesses and the appellant has not produced the credit notes pertaining to the period for which the claim was made, therefore, certain claims were disallowed and decreed the sum of ` 18,83,914.88. while examining the correctness of the judgment in the reference by the city civil court and the correctness of the finding recorded with regard to non-production of documents, the high court ought not to have taken a different view in view of the said direction issued by the commissioner for taking accounts in the preliminary decree which has been modified by the high court in first appeal no. 640 of 1981 etc. therefore, the fact remains that on the important aspect of the matter i.e. non-production of the documents, the adverse inference has rightly been drawn by the commissioner as well as by the trial court after adverting to the privy council judgment in motilal and ors. v. kundanlal and ors., a.i.r. 1917 privy council p.i., wherein it has been held that failure by a party in spite of the order for discovery to produce account books which ought to have been produced or should have explained the non-production raises a presumption that the contents were unfavourable to the party. thus, adverse inference should be drawn against the respondent. again, in support of the said proposition, the commissioner for taking accounts rightly placed reliance upon the judgment of this court in the case of gopal krishnaji ketkar v. mohd. haji latif and ors., manu/sc/0168/1969manu/sc/0168/1969 : a.i.r. 1968 sc 1413, wherein this court held that under sections 114(g) and 103 of the evidence act, 1872, a party in possession of best evidence which throw light on the issue in controversy withholding it, the court ought to draw an adverse inference against it notwithstanding that onus of proof does not lie on him and the party cannot relied on abstract doctrine of onus of proof or on the fact that he was not called upon to produce it. the trial court has rightly placed reliance upon the said judgments of privy council and this court and the commissioner has rightly drawn an adverse inference during the aforesaid period's statement of accounts recording the overriding commission. the high court while examining the correctness of the said judgment and decree passed by the reference court has partly affirmed by scaling down the amount from ` 43,86,974.98 to ` 18,83,914.88 even without drawing an adverse inference on non-production of accounts which are in the custody of the respondent. the aforesaid order of the preliminary decree which was affirmed by the high court in the previous round of litigation between the parties, the trial court on an erroneous assumption, disbelieving the claim of the plaintiff-appellant, without considering the conduct of the respondent disobeying the order passed by the commissioner for taking accounts and affirmed by the high court by affirming the preliminary decree passed in favour of the appellant, should not have disallowed the claims and scaled down the decretal amount from ` 43,86,974.98 to ` 18,83,914.88.5. aggrieved of the said portion of the judgment, the appellant has rightly filed the appeal before the high court. so also, the respondent aggrieved of allowing certain claims and disallowing its claim against the appellant also filed the appeal. the high court while examining the correctness of the judgment passed by the city civil court at ahmedabad in reference nos. 27 and 33 of 1980 affirmed the same without examining the erroneous finding recorded by the trial court in disallowing the claims of the appellant though the respondent has wilfully disobeyed by not complying with the direction to produce statement of accounts for the relevant period, as stated hereinabove, therefore the finding recorded on the contentious issue is not only erroneous but an error in law for the reason that the commissioner as well as the city civil court in reference nos. 27 and 33 of 1980, in view of the fact that the direction issued in the earlier round of litigation at the time of passing the preliminary decree to produce the documents for the aforesaid relevant period has been affirmed with a further modification to the commissioner's order directing the respondent to produce the record from 1.01.1968 to 5.08.1974, therefore, the high court ought to have considered the case of the appellant in his appeal with regard to disallowing certain claims. the respondent has withheld the production of the document, which is directed by the commissioner, city civil court, and as directed by the high court in the modified judgment dated 19.02.1985 in first appeal no. 640 of 1981 etc. the high court in the impugned judgment certainly does not justify in scaling down the decretal amount awarded by the commissioner on the basis of the evidence placed on record and the documents produced by the appellant before it, therefore, the findings recorded by both the city civil court and the high court are not only erroneous but also have committed an error in law.6. in the course of the arguments, it was pointed out to us that the city civil court has noticed in its reasoning portion of the judgment (para 10) with regard to the claim which the high court while affirming the preliminary decree does not direct the respondent to render account of the normal commission as obviously such account would be with and under the control of the appellant himself. thus the amount of ` 5,05,470.00 which is allowed by the commissioner and disallowed by the city civil court shall have to be deducted from the decretal amount of ` 43,86,974.98. to that extent the decree of the commissioner is modified. the appellant is entitled for the said sum with interest @ 7% p.a. on the remaining amount which is allowed in this appeal and which has been scaled down by the city civil court.7. we make it very clear that the amount which is decreed in the civil suit filed by the appellant which had been scaled down to ` 18,83,914.88, the said amount with interest awarded @ 10% p.a. is stated to be deposited with the trial court and has been withdrawn. having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case we disallow the claim accepted by the trial court and affirmed by the high court. we set aside that portion of the judgment. the remaining amount shall be deposited by the respondent within four weeks before the trial court along with interest at the rate of 7% p.a. from the date of the institution till the date of payment.8. with the abovesaid modification of the impugned judgment and order, we allow the appeal of the appellant.civil appeals @ s.l.p.(c) nos. 8790-8791/20119. leave granted.10. since we have allowed the appeal filed by the appellant, namely, mr. ajay kumar d. amin, in civil appeal arising out of s.l.p.(c) no. 25757 of 2010 questioning the correctness of the disallowed claim and decree passed by the city civil court and affirmed by the high court, the appeals filed by the appellant-air france are liable to be set aside. the appeals are dismissed without any order as to costs.
shivaraj v. patil, j.1. from the order of reference made in jaipur zila sahkari bhoomi vikas bank ltd. v. ram gopal sharma and anr. manu/sc/0867/1994manu/sc/0867/1994 : (1993)illj897sc , the question that arises for consideration is:"if the approval is not granted under section 33(2)(b) of the industrial disputes act, 1947, whether the order of dismissal becomes ineffective from the date it was passed or from the date of non-approval of the order of dismissal and whether failure to make application under section 33(2)(b) would not render the order of dismissal inoperative?"2. finding conflict of views expressed by benches of three learned judges of this court on the question, the reference is made.3. the two benches consisting of three learned judges in (1) strawboard manufacturing co. v. gobind manu/sc/0298/1962manu/sc/0298/1962 : (1962)illj420sc and (2) tata iron & steel co. ltd. v. s.n. modak manu/sc/0233/1965manu/sc/0233/1965 : (1965)iillj128sc have taken the view that if the approval is not granted under section 33(2)(b) of the industrial disputes act, 1947 (for short 'the act'), the order of dismissal becomes ineffective from the date it was passed and, therefore, the employee becomes entitled to wages from the date of dismissal to the date of disapproval of the application. another bench of three learned judges in punjab beverages pvt. ltd., chandigarh v. suresh chand and anr. manu/sc/0273/1978manu/sc/0273/1978 : (1978)iillj1sc has expressed the contrary view that non-approval of the order of dismissal or failure to make application under section 33(2)(b) would not render the order of dismissal inoperative; failure to apply for approval under section 33(2)(b) would only render the employer liable to punishment under section 31 of the act and the remedy of the employee is either by way of a complaint under section 33a or by way of a reference under section 10(1)(d) of the act. it may be stated here itself that there was no reference in this decision to the two earlier decisions aforementioned.4. a bench of two learned judge in s. ganapathi and ors. v. air india and anr. manu/sc/0368/1993manu/sc/0368/1993 : (1993)iillj731sc has followed the view taken in strawboard (supra) and tata iron & steel co. (supra) and has held that the order of dismissal passed without the approval under section 33(3)(b) remains in inchoate condition but this decision has not noticed the decision in punjab beverages (supra).5. rival submissions were made on behalf of the parties in support of the respective contentions in the light of aforementioned decisions and referring to and relying on the provisions contained in sections 31 33 and 33a of the act.6. answer to the question on which conflicting decisions are rendered, as noticed above, depends on a fair reading and proper interpretation of section 33(2)(b) of the act. prior to the amendment of 1956, provision contained in section 33 corresponded to the present section 33(1) only. the object behind enacting section 33, as it stood before it was amended in 1956, was to allow continuance of industrial proceedings pending before any authority/court/tribunal prescribed by the act in a peaceful atmosphere undisturbed by any other industrial dispute. in course of time, it was felt that unamended section 33 was too stringent for it placed a total ban on the right of the employer to make any alteration in conditions of service or to make any order of discharge or dismissal even in cases where such alteration in conditions of service or passing of an order of dismissal or discharge, was not in any manner connected with the dispute pending before an industrial authority. it appears, therefore, that section 33 was amended in 1956 permitting the employer to make changes in conditions of service or to discharge or dismiss an employee in relation to matters not connected with the pending industrial dispute. at the same time, it seems to have been felt that there was need to provide some safeguards for a workman who may be discharged or dismissed during the pendency of a dispute on account of some matter unconnected with the dispute. this position is clear by reading re-drafted expanded section 33 in 1956 containing five sub-sections. for the present purpose, we are concerned with the proviso to section 33(2)(b). the material and relevant portion of section 33 reads:-"conditions of service, etc. to remain unchanged under certain circumstances during pendency of proceedings. -- (1) .....(2) during the pendency of any such proceeding in respect of an industrial dispute, the employer may, in accordance with standing orders applicable to a workman concerned in such dispute or, where there are no such standing order, in accordance with the terms of the contract, whether express or implied, between him and the workman -(a) .....(b) for any misconduct not connected with the dispute, discharge or punish, whether by dismissal or otherwise, that workman;provided that no such workman shall be discharged or dismissed, unless he has been paid wages for one month and an application has been made by the employer to the authority before which the proceeding is pending for approval of the action taken by the employer."7. the proviso expressly and specifically states that no workmen shall be discharged or dismissed unless he has been paid wages for one month and an application has been made by the employer to the authority before which the proceeding is pending for approval of the action taken by the employer. it is clear from the proviso to section 33(2)(b) that the employer may pass an order of dismissal or discharge and at the same time make an application for approval of the action taken by him. in the strawboard case (supra) dealing with the contention that if the employer dismisses or discharges a workman and then applies for approval of the action taken and the tribunal refuses to approve the action, the workman would be left with no remedy as there is no provision for reinstatement in section 33(2), it is held that "if the tribunal does not approve of the action taken by the employer, the result would be that the action taken by him would fall and thereupon the workman would be deemed never to have been dismissed or discharged and would remain in the service of the employer".8. a constitution bench of this court in the case of p.h. kalyani v. air france calcutta manu/sc/0137/1963manu/sc/0137/1963 : (1963)illj679sc referring to strawboard has observed thus:-"the main point which was raised in this appeal is now concluded by the decision of this court in the straw board manufacturing co. limited, saharanpur v. govind. this court has held in that case that "the proviso to section 33(2)(b) contemplates the three things mentioned therein, namely, (i) dismissal or discharge, (ii) payment of wages, and (iii) making of an application for approval, to be simultaneous and to be part of the same transaction so that the employer when he takes the action under section 33(2) by dismissing or discharging an employee, should immediately pay him or offer to pay him wages for one month and also make an application to the tribunal for approval at the same time. it was further held that "the employer's conduct should show that the three things contemplated under the proviso, are parts of the same transaction; and the question whether the application was made as part of the same transaction or at the same time when the action was taken would be a question of fact and will depend upon the circumstances of each case."9. in the case of tata iron and steel co. (supra) it is reiterated and states thus:-"it is now well-settled that the requirements of the proviso have to be satisfied by the employer on the basis that they form part of the same transaction; and stated generally, the employer must either pay or offer the salary for one month to the employee before passing an order of his discharge or dismissal, and must apply to the specified authority for approval of his action at the same time, or within such reasonably short time thereafter as to form part of the same transaction. it is also settled that if approval is granted, it takes effect from the date of the order passed by the employer for which approval was sought. if approval is not granted, the order of dismissal or discharge passed by the employer is wholly invalid or inoperative, and the employee can legitimately claim to continue to be in the employment of the employer notwithstanding the order passed by him dismissing or discharging him. in other words, approval by the prescribed authority makes the order of discharge or dismissal effective; in the absence of approval, such an order is invalid and inoperative in law."10. in the same judgment, it is also stated that "order of dismissal or discharge being incomplete and inchoate until the approval is obtained, cannot effectively terminate the relationship of the employer and employee and that if the approval is not accorded by the tribunal, the employer would be bound to treat the respondent as its employee and paying his full wages for the period even though the employer may subsequently proceed to terminate the services of the respondent".11. per contra, in punjab beverages (supra), it is held that an order dismissing the workman contravening section 33(2)(b) shall not be void and inoperative and hence the workman was not entitled to maintain the application for determination and payment of wages under section 33(c)(2); a workman can proceed under section 33(c)(2) only after the tribunal has adjudicated on a complaint under section 33a or on a reference under section 10 that the order of discharge or dismissal was not justified and has set aside that order and reinstated the workman; rejecting a contention that the workman would be left without any remedy on the interpretation that contravention of section 33 does not invalidate an order of discharge or dismissal, it is stated that if the employer contravenes section 33, he would be liable to punishment under section 31(1) and moreover the aggrieved workman can act under section 10 or he can make a complaint to the tribunal under section 33a; it was held that the withdrawal of the application made under section 33(2)(b) stands on the same footing as if no application thereunder has been made; if there was no decision on merit of the said application, it cannot be said that the approval has been refused by the tribunal.12. the facts of the said case are: the workman was dismissed from service holding him guilty after inquiry by an order dated 23rd december, 1974. since an industrial dispute was pending at that time, in view of the provisions contained in section 33(2)(b), the employer approached the industrial tribunal at chandigarh before which the industrial dispute was pending for approval of the action taken. however, that application was dismissed as withdrawn on 4th september, 1976. then the workman demanded full wages from the employer from the date of his suspension till the date of demand contending that the action of the employer dismissing him from service was not approved by the tribunal; he continued to be in service and was entitled to all the emoluments. since the employer did not respond, he made an application to the labour court under section 33(c)(2) for determination and payment of the amount of wages due to him. the employer resisted the said application inter alia on the ground that the application under section 33(2)(b) having been withdrawn, the effect of which was as if no application had been made at all; even though there was contravention of section 33(2)(b) in not making an application seeking approval, it did not render the order of dismissal void ab initio and it was merely illegal and unless it is set aside in an appropriate proceeding taken by the employee under section 33a or in a reference under section 10, the labour court had no jurisdiction under section 33(c)(2) to direct payment of wages to the first respondent on the basis as if he continued in service. the labour court rejected this contention and allowed the application of the workman filed under section 33(c)(2). this court, allowing the appeals by special leave, held that the employer contravened section 33(2)(b) in dismissing the workman but such contravention did not have the effect of rendering the order of dismissal void or inoperative and hence the workman was not entitled to maintain the application under section 33(c)(2). however, the amounts ordered to be paid by the labour court were treated as compensation instead of wages to meet the demands of social justice. the reasons recorded in taking such a view are: (i) section 33 in both its limbs undoubtedly uses mandatory language and section 31(1) makes it penal for the employer to commit a breach of the provisions of section 33 and, therefore, if section 33 stood alone, it might lend itself to the construction that any action by way of discharge or dismissal taken against workman would be void if it is in contravention of section 33. but section 33 cannot be read in isolation, for the intention of the legislature has to be gathered not from the one provision but from the whole of the statute. if sections 33 and 33a are read together, it is clear that legislative intent shall not invalidate an order of discharge or dismissal passed in contravention of section 33 despite the mandatory language implied in the section and the penal provision enacted in section 31(1), (ii) the mere contravention of section 33 by the employer will not entitle the workman to tan order of reinstatement because inquiry under section 33a is not confined only to the determination as to the contravention of section 33, but even if such contravention is proved, the tribunal has to go further and deal also with the merits of the order of discharge or dismissal. (iii) if the contravention of section 33 were construed as having invalidating effect of the order of discharge or dismissal, section 33a would be rendered meaningless and futile, because in that event the workman would invariably prefer to make an application straightaway under section 33(c)(2) even before adjudication whether the order of discharge or dismissal is void and inoperative. (iv) the contention of the workman that in the absence of approval for action taken under section 33(2)(b), the order of dismissal was inoperative, was rejected on the ground that withdrawal of the application made for approval stood on the same footing as if no application under section 33(2)(b) has been made at all; since there was no application made under section 33(2)(b), the tribunal had no occasion to apply its mind to consider whether the dismissal of workman amounted to victimization or unfair labour practice. hence, it was difficult to say that the approval has been refused by the tribunal.13. the proviso to section 33(2)(b), as can be seen from its very unambiguous and clear language, is mandatory. this apart, from the object of section 33 and in the context of the proviso to section 33(2)(b), it is obvious that the conditions contained in the said proviso are to be essentially complied with. further any employer who contravenes the provisions of section 33 invites a punishment under section 31(1) with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to rs. 1000/- or with both. this penal provision is again a pointer of the mandatory nature of the proviso to comply with the conditions stated therein. to put it in other way, the said conditions being mandatory, are to be satisfied if an order of discharge or dismissal passed under section 33(2)(b) is to be operative. if an employer desires to take benefit of the said provision for passing an order of discharge or dismissal of an employee, he has also to take the burden of discharging the statutory obligation placed on him in the said proviso. taking a contrary view that an order of discharge or dismissal passed by an employer in contravention of the mandatory conditions contained in the proviso does not render such an order inoperative or void, defeats the very purpose of the proviso and it becomes meaningless. it is well-settled rule of interpretation that no part of statute shall be construed as unnecessary or superfluous. the proviso cannot be diluted or disobeyed by an employer. he cannot disobey the mandatory provision and then say that the order of discharge or dismissal made in contravention of section 33(2)(b) is not void or inoperative. he cannot be permitted to take advantage of his own wrong. the interpretation of statute must be such that it should advance the legislative intent and serve the purpose for which it is made rather than to frustrate it. the proviso to section 33(2)(b) affords protection to a workman to safeguard his interest and it is a shield against victimization and unfair labour practice by the employer during the pendency of industrial dispute when the relationship between them are already strained. an employer cannot be permitted to use the provision of section 33(2)(b) to ease out a workman without complying with the conditions contained in the said proviso for any alleged misconduct said to be unconnected with the already pending industrial dispute. the protection afforded to a workman under the said provision cannot be taken away. if it is to be held that an order of discharge or dismissal passed by the employer without complying with the requirements of the said proviso is not void or inoperative, the employer may with impunity discharge or dismiss a workman.14. where an application is made under section 33(2)(b) proviso, the authority before which the proceeding is pending for approval of the action taken by the employer has to examine whether the order of dismissal or discharge is bona fide; whether it was by way of victimization or unfair labour practice; whether the conditions contained in the proviso were complied with or not, etc. if the authority refuses to grant approval obviously it follows that the employee continues to be in service as if order of discharge or dismissal never had been passed. the order of dismissal or discharge passed invoking section 33(2)(b) dismissing or discharging an employee brings an end of relationship of employer and employee from the date of his dismissal or discharge but that order remains incomplete and remains inchoate as it is subject to approval of the authority under the said provision. in other words, this relationship comes to an end de jure only when the authority grants approval. if approval is not given, nothing more is required to be done by the employee, as it will have to be deemed that the order of discharge or dismissal had never been passed. consequence of it is that the employee is deemed to have continued in service entitling him to all the benefits available. this being the position there is no need of a separate or specific order for his reinstatement. but on the other hand, if approval is given by the authority and if the employee is aggrieved by such an approval, he is entitled to make a complaint under section 33a challenging the order granting approval on any of the grounds available to him. section 33a is available only to an employee and is intended to save his time and trouble inasmuch as he can straightaway make a complaint before the very authority where the industrial dispute is already pending between the parties challenging the order of approval instead of making efforts to raise an industrial dispute, get a reference and thereafter adjudication. in this view, it is not correct to say that even though where the order of discharge or dismissal is inoperative for contravention of the mandatory conditions contained in the proviso or where the approval is refused, a workman should still make a complaint under section 33a and that the order of dismissal or discharge becomes invalid or void only when it is set aside under section 33a and that till such time he should suffer misery of unemployment in spite of statutory protection given to him by the proviso to section 33(2)(b). it is not correct to say that where the order of discharge or dismissal becomes inoperative because of contravention of proviso to section 33(2)(b), section 33a would be meaningless and futile. the said section has a definite purpose to serve, as already stated above, enabling an employee to make a complaint, if aggrieved by the order of the approval granted.15. the view that when no application is made or the one made is withdrawn, there is no order of refusal of such application on merit and as such the order of dismissal or discharge does not become void or inoperative unless such an order is set aside under section 33a, cannot be accepted. in our view, not making an application under section 33(2)(b) seeking approval or withdrawing an application once made before any order is made thereon, is a clear case of contravention of the proviso to section 33(2)(b). an employer who does not make an application under section 33(2)(b) or withdraws the one made, cannot be rewarded by relieving him of the statutory obligation created on him to make such an application. if it is so done, he will be happier or more comfortable than an employer who obeys the command of law and makes an application inviting scrutiny of the authority in the matter of granting approval of the action taken by him. adherence to and obedience of law should be obvious and necessary in a system governed by rule of law. an employer by design can avoid to make an application after dismissing or discharging an employee or file it and withdraw before any order is passed on it, on its merits, to take a position that such order is not inoperative or void till it is set aside under section 33a notwithstanding the contravention of section 33(2)(b), proviso, driving the employee to have recourse to one or more proceeding by making a complaint under section 33a or to raise another industrial dispute or to make a complaint under section 31(1). such an approach destroys the protection specifically and expressly given to an employee under the said proviso as against possible victimization, unfair labour practice or harassment because of pendency of industrial dispute so that an employee can be saved from hardship of unemployment.16. section 31 speaks of penalty in respect of the offences stated therein. this provision is not intended to give any remedy to an aggrieved employee. it is only to punish the offender. the argument that section 31 provides a remedy to an employee for contravention of section 33 is unacceptable. merely because penal provision is available or a workman has a further remedy under section 33a to challenge the approval granted it cannot be said that the order of discharge or dismissal not become inoperative or invalid unless set aside under section 33a. there is nothing in section 31 33 and 33a to suggest otherwise even reading them together in the context. these sections are intended to serve different purposes.17. as already noticed above, the constitution bench of this court in p.h. kalyani v. air france calcutta has referred to strawboard manufacturing co. v. gobind and approved the view taken in the said decision as regards the requirements of the proviso to section 33(2)(b). unfortunately in punjab beverages pvt. ltd. v. suresh chand, the earlier two cases of strawboard and tata iron & steel co. were not noticed touching the question. it is true that in s. ganapathi and ors. v. air india and anr., there is no reference to punjab beverages. but the view taken in two earlier decisions of strawboard and tata iron & steel co. is followed on the question and rightly so in our opinion.18. in view of what is stated above, we respectfully agree with and endorse the view taken in the case of strawboard and tata iron & steel co. and further state that the view expressed in punjab beverages on the question is not the correct view. the question raised in the beginning of this judgment is answered accordingly.19. in these appeals, respondent no. 1 was employed as clerk-cum-cashier with the appellant. he was dismissed from service. as certain proceedings were pending before the industrial tribunal, jaipur, an application seeking approval of the tribunal for the said dismissal was submitted by the appellant before the tribunal under section 33(2)(b). the said application was contested on various grounds by the respondent including that the appellant-bank had failed to comply with the provisions of section 33(2)(b) as salary for one month was not paid. the tribunal, on facts, found that the appellant failed to comply with the provisions of section 33(2)(b) and in that view dismissed the application. the appellant challenged the order of the tribunal before the high court in writ petition no. 666 of 1980. the same was dismissed concurring with the order passed by the tribunal.20. in the view we have taken, the contentions raised in these appeals do not help the appellant. we find no merit in these appeals. consequently, these are dismissed. no costs.
g.p. mathur, j.1. these appeals are directed against the judgment and order dated 18.4.2000 of a division bench of patna high court, by which the writ petition preferred by m/s j.m.d. alloys ltd. was partly allowed and the bihar state electricity board was directed to serve a fresh bill as per the observations made in the judgment and to restore the electricity connection within two days of the payment of the said bill.2. m/s j.m.d. alloys ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner) has a high tension industrial connection of electricity for running induction furnaces for manufacturing steel ingots. the officials of the bihar state electricity board (hereinafter referred to as "the electricity board") inspected the petitioner's factory premises on 26th and 27th august, 1999 and found that the seal fixed on ct/pt box was tampered. an fir was lodged at the concerned police station on 27.8.1999 alleging that the petitioner had committed theft of 6.96 lakh units and had thereby caused a loss of rs. 2.58 crores to the electricity board. the electricity board thereafter issued a bill dated 31.8.1999 for rs. 8,85,77,131/-. this bill was challenged by the petitioner by filing cwjc no. 8939 of 1999 before the high court. the learned single judge, who heard the writ petition vide his judgment/order dated 27.9.1999 directed that a show cause notice in the light of the observations made in the judgment be given to the petitioner within a week and it will be open to the petitioner to raise all its defences against the charge of committing theft of electrical energy and/or drawing electrical energy at a load higher than its contracted demand. it was further directed that the show notice shall be given by the general manager-cum-chief engineer, central bihar area, electricity board, patna, or by any other officer of the electricity board of equal or higher rank and he shall pass final order after giving an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner. the liability of the petitioner was to be determined afresh on the basis of the final order passed by the chief engineer.3. the chief engineer (transmission) bihar state electricity board thereafter issued a notice dated 13.10.1999 to which a reply was given by the petitioner on 20.10.1999. after affording an opportunity of personal hearing and considering the reply, the chief engineer passed an order on 27.10.1999 holding that clause 16.9 (b) and (c) of tariff is attracted and the consumer m/s. j.m.d. alloys ltd. is liable to pay compensatory bill in terms of the aforesaid clause of the tariff. in accordance with the decision of the chief engineer, a fresh bill dated 29.10.1999 for rs. 7,85,77,131/- was issued. this bill was again challenged by the petitioner by filing a writ petition which was dismissed by a learned single judge on 13.12.1999. against the said decision the petitioner preferred a letters patent appeal which was partly allowed by the division bench by the impugned judgment and order dated 18.4.2000. the division bench held that the petitioner is liable to pay electricity charges in accordance with clause 16.9 of the tariff. however with regard to fuel surcharge it was held that the same cannot be levied at thrice the rate in accordance with clause 16.9 of the tariff, which permits consumption of electricity to be assessed at thrice the rate per unit. feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid decision, m/s. j.m.d. alloys ltd. have preferred civil appeal no. 8394 of 2002 and the bihar state electricity boards has preferred civil appeal no. 8395 of 2002.4. as stated earlier, the chief engineer (transmission), bihar state electricity board, issued a notice dated 13.10.1999 to the petitioner. the notice was issued on the grounds, inter alia, that the inspection of the business premises of the petitioner was conducted from 14.15 hours to 20.30 hours on 26.8.1999 and thereafter on the following day; that on examination of ct/pt unit and its terminal box, the seal bearing no. 045660p which was put on ct/pt terminal box on 14.5.1999, was found to be tampered with and the signature of the authority was also not found on the same; that a seizure memo of the tampered seal was prepared on the same day; that on account of the fact that the seal on the terminal box had been removed, it had become easily accessible to the consumer and by fiddling with the terminals, namely by removing the wires or putting wires of higher resistance, the flow of energy to the metering unit was manipulated to show a very low recording of both kva and unit consumption; that the total capacity of induction furnaces on operation was 12 m.t. for which energy requirement was 7200 kva but the petitioner had entered into a contract demand of 4850 kva and, therefore, the consumer was engaged in theft of electricity and was consuming energy at a much higher load than the contracted demand; that the supplier of the furnaces to the petitioner, namely megatherm electronic pvt. ltd. had reported to the director general of police (vigilance), bihar state electricity board consumption equivalent to approximately 3000 kva for running the furnaces exclusive of auxiliary load like water supply, cooling systems, cranes, etc; that the feasibility report given to the electricity board by the petitioner showed that the minimum required energy for each mt furnace was 500 kva for the furnace alone besides 100 kva for auxiliary load and thus 600 kva was required for each mt furnace; that the electronic meter showed that the power had been consumed by the factory on an average basis of 21.25 hours per day which runs into two shifts of 12 hours each having 40 workers in each shift and the load and the capacity of two furnaces showed production of 3000 mt ingots every month and, therefore, the minimum consumption of power was 16.20 lakh units per month whereas bills had been paid on an average of 9.24 lakh units per month; that the theft of power was further substantiated from the meter reading of j.d. feeder at 33/11 kva air force sub-station bihta and also the claim filed by the petitioner under clause 13 of the agreement and on the basis of the aforesaid facts and material it was obvious that the petitioner had been committing theft of electricity on a massive scale by tampering with the seal of the ct/pt terminal cover. the petitioner was accordingly directed to show cause as to why a bill in terms of clause 16.9 of the tariff notification be not raised. the petitioner give a reply to the show cause notice raising various pleas and denying that it had committed any theft of electricity. it was pleaded that the meter had been regularly inspected by different teams of the electricity board but no tampering of the seal of the ct/pt terminal cover had been found; that the furnaces can operate only to the extent of 80% of its rated capacity; that the electricity board itself had assessed the capacity of the connected load at 5100 kva, which was very near to the contracted demand; that the meter installed in the factory premises never recorded a maximum demand of more than the contracted demand; that the assumption that 100 kva per ton is required for auxiliary load was not based on facts and that in the case of a high tension industrial consumer the connected load is of no relevance because to constantly monitor the load availed of by a high tension consumer a trivector meter, containing the maximum demand indicator is compulsorily installed. it was further submitted that the seal in ct/pt unit had not been tampered with and the allegation regarding tampering of the seal was being investigated by the investigating officer of the criminal case registered against the petitioner and his report shall be considered by the court of law at the appropriate time.5. the chief engineer after consideration of the material and the submission made held that the theft of electricity cannot be found physically and this has to be worked out from evidences parameters and various circumstances under which the consumer is availing power. he passed a detailed order on 27.10.1999 and the relevant part of the findings recorded by him are being reproduced below:"it appears from annexure 1 of show-cause notice that two nos. of induction furnaces of six m.t. capacity each totalling 12 mt were in operation. this is supported by the facts with the inspection report that the total capacity of transformer was 7230 kva. the ctpt cover terminal seal which was found tampered was unsigned. there were large number officials of the board including executive magistrates and therefore there is no reason to disbelieve that seal of terminal cover of ctpt was tampered. the capacity of the furnaces being 12 mt it is evidently clear that the power was used unauthorised by the consumer because the consumption recorded in the meter was much less than what it ought to have been on actual load i.e. 7200 kva (600 x 12 t). in this connection the annexure-3 & 4 the vouchers of the purchase of induction furnace from meghaterm, show the capacity of induction furnace, 6 mt as 2500 kw i.e. equivalent to 3000 kva therefore the load of 12 m.t. furnace besides @ kva/mt as auxiliary load totalling to 7200 kva as the actual load. it is not out of place to mention here that the induction furnace association of bihar has proposed and agreed that the load of induction furnace could be 600 kva per m.t.this is also brought to my notice that on average basis the power was consumed at the average period of 21.25 hrs. per day. the factory runs into two shifts with 40 workers in each shift. so far as the nos of days of pilferage is concerned, it has been rightly interpreted and assessed the maximum period of six months for the assessment of compensatory amount under clause 16.9 of tariff.the variant factors of the consumption as per formula i.e. lefxhed have been thoroughly taken care of in the formula provided in the tariff.from the facts and circumstances as set forth above, it is absolutely clear that clause 16.9 (b) and (c) of tariff is attracted and the consumer m/s. jmd alloys is liable to pay the compensatory bill in terms of clause 16.9 of tariff.6. in accordance with the order of the chief engineer, a fresh electricity bill was prepared on 29.10.1999 for rs. 4,09,32,925/- towards the cost of units of electricity and rs. 3,90,73,217/- towards fuel surcharge. after adding the electricity duty and charges for rental of transformer and fuse replacement etc. a bill was issued for rs. 8,85,77,131/-.7. shri gopal subramanium, learned senior counsel for the petitioner, has submitted that the factory premises of the petitioner had been inspected on 14.5.1999 and then again on 20.7.1999 and no irregularity of any kind had been fund on the said dates and, therefore, the allegation that the petitioner had tampered with the seal of ct/pt unit is wholly incorrect. there was no material or evidence to show that any effort had been made by the petitioner to interfere with the metering unit which may have the effect of showing lesser consumption of energy. learned counsel has also submitted that in absence of any evidence relating to presence of artificial means which would have rendered abstraction of electrical energy possible the provisions of clause 16.9 of the tariff could not be made applicable and the electricity bill issued to the petitioner is incorrect. it has also been urged that the last inspection of the petitioner's premises having been done on 20.7.1999, there is no justification for counting the period of dishonest abstraction of energy as 180 days (six months) and, therefore, the bill issued to the petitioner is for much longer period which was not permissible in law. the learned counsel has further submitted that the findings recorded by the chief engineer are wholly incorrect as instead of basing his order on the actual production of steel, he has gone by the capacity of the furnaces. shri subramanium has also urged that the faulty recording of the meter has to be judged from the standpoint of section 26(6) of the indian electricity act, 1910 and the matter should have been referred to electrical inspector.8. shri v.r. reddy, learned senior counsel for the electricity board, has submitted that section 26(6) of the indian electricity act has no application to a case where the seal fixed on ct/pt terminal box had been tampered with and the recording of consumption by the meter had been effected by recourse to artificial means. learned counsel has laid stress on the fact that the chief engineer, after considering all the relevant material and circumstances has recorded a categorical finding that the seal of the ct/pt terminal box had been tampered with and the petitioner had exceeded the contracted load and had also dishonestly abstracted electrical energy to a very large extent. according to the learned counsel, the findings recorded by the chief engineer being based upon relevant material are not open to challenge in proceedings under article 226 of the constitution of india. in support of the appeal preferred by the electricity board, shri reddy has submitted that the surcharge being part of the electricity bill, the division bench of the high court had erred in holding that the same was chargeable on per unit basis and not at thrice the value thereof. according to the learned counsel, in view of clause 16.9 of the tariff, the fuel surcharge has also to be levied at three times the units assessed.9. it may be stated at the very outset that a detailed show cause notice dated 13.10.1999 mentioning all the relevant facts was served upon the petitioner to which the petitioner gave a reply on 20.10.1999. the order of the chief engineer mentions that the petitioner was afforded an opportunity of personal hearing and is counsel appeared before him and argued the matter on 25.10.1999 and 26.10.1999. the chief engineer has recorded a clear finding that the seal on ct/pt terminal box was found to be tampered with. a seal bearing no. 045660p had been put on the ct/pt terminal box on 14.5.1999 and the authority fixing the seal had put his signatures thereon. at the time of the inspection on 27.8.1999, the seal was found to be tampered with, which was seized by the inspecting team. the seal did not contain the signature of the authority who had put the seal. the record shows that the inspection had been done by a high level team consisting of as many as 8 responsible officers, some of whom had come from the headquarters of the electricity board at patna. an executive magistrate was also a member of the team. the manager of the petitioner himself lodged a report on 28.8.1999 with the deputy superintendent of police, danapur (patna), alleging that 8 officers of the bihar state electricity board with armed force visited and tested the installation and the members of the team with the help of screw and plier themselves tampered with the cover of the lt terminal box of ct/pt and the plastic seal was removed and brought down by one of the executive engineers. however, in reply to the show cause notice filed by the petitioner, tampering of the seal was denied and it was pleaded that the matter was being investigated by the investigating officer of the criminal case registered against the petitioner and his report shall be considered by the court at the appropriate time. the chief engineer after considering the entire material and taking into consideration the fact that there were large number of officers of the board at the time of the inspection, has recorded a finding that the seal had been tampered with. it is an admitted position that in the factory of the petitioner there were two furnaces, each of 6 mt and thus the total capacity was 12 mt. the manufacturer of the induction furnaces namely, megatherm electronic pvt. ltd. had given in writing that the load of 6 mt induction furnace was 2500 kv which is equivalent to 3000 kva and, therefore, the actual load of the furnaces installed at the petitioner's factory, after taking into consideration the auxiliary load, came to 7200 kva. the induction furnaces association of bihar of which the petitioner is also a member, had agreed and proposed that the load of an induction furnace could be taken to be 600 kva per mt. on consideration of these factors the chief engineer came to a conclusion that the actual load of the petitioner's factory was 7200 kva. the other material which has been considered by the chief engineer is that on an average the power was consumed for 21.25 hours per day as the factory was running in two shifts with 40 workers in each shift and, therefore, the number of units being actually consumed were much higher than that recorded in the meter. on the basis of these findings, the assessment has been made of the compensatory amount under clause 16.9 of the tariff.10. the contention that the dispute regarding tampering of the seal of ct/pt terminal unit should have been referred to the electrical inspector, has hardly any merit. in madhya pradesh electricity board and ors. v. basantibai, manu/sc/0389/1987manu/sc/0389/1987 : [1988]1scr890 , it has been held that a dispute regarding the commission of fraud in tampering with the meter and breaking the body seal is one outside the ambit of section 26(6) of the indian electricity act and the electrical inspector has no jurisdiction to decide such cases of fraud. it was further held that under section 26(6), the only dispute which can be decided by the electrical inspector is as to whether the meter is correct and is accurately recording the reading or there is some fault in the same. since in the present case it has been found that the seal on the ct/pt terminal box had been tampered with and the natural working of the meter had been affected by taking recourse to external devices, a dispute of this kind cannot be referred to an electrical inspector.11. the next contention raised is that the period of 180 days for which theft of electricity has been assessed is absolutely wrong and has no rational basis. the electricity board has proceeded on the footing that clause 16.9 of the tariff framed by the bihar state electricity board with the approval of the state government is applicable. clause 16.9 of the tariff reads as under:"16.9 (a) detection of unauthorised load :- if at any time the consumer is found exceeding the contracted load without specific permission of the board, the board may without prejudice to its other rights under the agreement or under the provisions of the electricity act, estimate the value of the electrical energy, so extracted, consumed or used shall be calculated as below and may also disconnect the supply without notice:-i. necessary assessment for compensation in the following malpractice and theft of energy cases shall be made as below:-(a) .....(b) in case of using energy by creating obstruction in running of meters or interfering with the system of supply or wires etc.(c) .....unit assessed - l x f x h x dwhere l = .....h = .....d = is the no. of days for which the pilferage took place which can be established from production of satisfactory evidence by the consumer. in case there is no possible evidence to establish the period, this factor be taken equivalent to 180 or the no. of days elapsed from the date of connection/installation of meter till the date of detection of the pilferage whichever is less.f= .....ii. .....iii. method of charging the assessed units as indicated in para i & ii above.(a) the consumption so assessed shall be charged at thrice the rate per unit of the tariff applicable to the consumer excluding the consumption recorded by the meter and the latter shall be charged at the appropriate tariff rates. the amount billed at this (thrice the tariff rate) shall not be taken into consideration for the purpose of computing consumer's liability to pay monthly/minimum guarantee.(b) .....iv when connected load is more than the sanctioned load in case of all categories lt connection except domestic service.assessment charge:- rs. c x m (ld-ls)x3 where, m= minimum consumption guarantee charge per bhp per month as applicable in the tariff schedule.ld--is the load detected in bhp at the time of inspection.ls=is the load sanctioned to the consumer in bhpc=this factor be taken equivalent to six months or no. of months or part thereof elapsed from the date of connection/installation whichever is less."12. the relevant part of the tariff quoted above shows that in the cases of theft of electricity or dishonest abstraction of electrical energy the assessment for compensation has to be done on the basis of a formula wherein 'd' stands for number of days for which the pilferage took place and where there is no possible evidence to establish the period, this factor can be taken to be equivalent to 180 days. similarly, in a case where connected load is more than the sanctioned load, the assessment charge has to be done on the basis of a formula where 'c' stands for six months or the number of months or part thereof elapsed from the date of connection/installation, whichever is less. therefore under the tariff in both the cases the period can be taken as 180 days or six months. it is on the basis of this formula that the assessment for consumption of units has been done for 180 days. in hyderabad vanaspathi ltd. v. a.p. state electricity board and ors., manu/sc/0260/1998manu/sc/0260/1998 : [1998]2scr620 , it has been held that the terms of conditions for supply of electricity to consumers notified by the board in exercise of power under section 49 of electricity (supply) act, 1948 and made applicable to all consumers availing supply of electricity, are statutory in character. this being the legal position, the electricity board in our opinion rightly applied clause 16.9 of the tariff and there is no infirmity in the assessment made and the bill prepared in pursuance thereof.13. shri gopal subramanium has also submitted that after the inspection had been done on 27.8.1999, an fir had been lodged against the petitioner on the same day by shri om prakash, assistant executive engineer at the police station and a criminal case was registered under section 39/44 of indian electricity act. this case was investigated and thereafter a final report was submitted, which was accepted by the concerned magistrate and as a result of this order, the petitioner stands exonerated from the charge of theft of electricity and no compensatory bill could be issued by taking recourse to clause 16.9 of the tariff. shri v.r. reddy, learned senior counsel for the electricity board has submitted that before accepting the final report, the learned magistrate had issued notice to shri om prakash, assistant executive engineer, but the said notice was not served upon him as he was transferred from patna on account of his allocation to jharkhand state and as such no representation could be made on behalf of the electricity board against the final report. subsequently, an application has been moved on behalf of the electricity board before the concerned magistrate for recall of the order by which final report was accepted. in our opinion, the mere acceptance of final report by the magistrate cannot amount to a finding by the criminal court that theft of electricity was not committed. the accused was not even summoned, no charge was framed nor any evidence was recorded. in such a situation, it cannot be held that the criminal court has recorded any finding to the effect that the petitioner has not committed theft of electricity. that apart, the purpose of a trial under section 39/44 of the indian electricity act is entirely different and the object is to punish and sentence the person who is alleged to have committed the offence. the trial of an accused in a criminal case can have no bearing in the matter of assessment made in accordance with the tariff of the value of electricity dishonestly abstracted or consumed. therefore, the contention raised on the basis of alleged acceptance of the final report in the criminal case has absolutely no merit.14. it is to be noted that in pursuance of the order passed on 27.9.1999 by the high court in cwjc no. 8939 of 1999, the chief engineer decided the matter holding that the petitioner had exceeded the contracted load and had also committed theft of electricity and consequently assessment of compensatory amount had to be done in accordance with clause 16.9 of the tariff. in terms of the order of the chief engineer the bill dated 29.10.1999 was prepared which was challenged by the petitioner by filing the writ petition before the high court under article 226 of the constitution. the high court was not hearing an appeal against the decision of the chief engineer. the scope of inquiry in such a matter is a limited one. we would like to quote here what was said by venkatachaliah, j. in state of u.p. and ors. v. maharaja dharmander prasad singh, manu/sc/0563/1989manu/sc/0563/1989 : [1989]1scr176 , which reads as under:"however, judicial review under article 226 cannot be converted into appeal. judicial review is directed, not against the decision, but is confined to the examination of the decision making process. in chief constable of the north wales police v. evans (1982) 1 w.l.r. 1155 refers to the merits-legality distinction in judicial review. lord hailsham said:"the purpose of judicial review is to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the authority, after according fair treatment reaches on a matter which it is authorised by law to decide for itself a conclusion which is correct in the eyes of the court."lord brightman observed:".....judicial review, as the words imply, is not an appeal from a decision, but a review of the manner in which the decision was made....."and held that it would be an error to think:".....that the court sits in judgment not only on the correctness of the decision making process but also on the correctness of the decision itself".when the issue raised in judicial review is whether a decision is vitiated by taking into account, irrelevant, or neglecting to take into account of relevant factors or is so manifestly unreasonable that no reasonable authority entrusted with the power in question could reasonably have made such a decision, the judicial review of the decision-making process includes examination, as a matter of law, of the relevance of the factors. ....."15. in apparel export promotion council v. a.k. chopra, manu/sc/0014/1999manu/sc/0014/1999 : (1999)illj962sc , chief justice anand held as under:"judicial review, not being an appeal from a decision, but a review of the manner in which the decision was arrived at, the court while exercising the power of judicial review must remain conscious of the fact that if the decision has been arrived at by the administrative authority after following the principles established by law and the rules of natural justice and the individual has received a fair treatment to meet the case against him, the court cannot substitute its judgment for that of the administrative authority on a matter which fell squarely within the sphere of jurisdiction of that authority."16. there is no dispute that the chief engineer issued notice to the petitioner mentioning all the relevant facts to which the petitioner gave a reply. the petitioner was also afforded an opportunity of hearing and it appeared through a counsel, who made submissions on two days and thereafter the chief engineer passed the order. as discussed earlier, the chief engineer has taken into consideration relevant factors and the findings recorded by him are clearly borne out from the material available before him. it cannot be said that the order passed by him is unreasonable or perverse in any manner. the high court therefore rightly took the view that the order passed by the chief engineer that the compensatory bill is to be prepared in accordance with clause 16.9 of the tariff could not be interfered with in(sic) writ petition under article 226 of the constitution.17. the bihar state electricity board feels aggrieved by that part of the judgment and order of the division bench of the high court by which it has been held that the surcharge cannot be levied at thrice the rate per unit and has accordingly filed civil appeal no. 8395 of 2002. shri v.r. reddy, learned senior counsel for the electricity board has submitted that the cost of a unit of electricity is not fixed and on the contrary it is dependent upon the fuel surcharge. the formula for calculating the fuel surcharge is a long and complicated one and is given in clause 16.10.3 of the tariff. a host of factors have to be taken into consideration in calculating the fuel surcharge and they depend upon many variables. shri reddy has submitted that since the surcharge has necessarily to be taken into consideration and has to be added in the cost of electricity (sic) accordance with part (iii) of clause 16.9 of the tariff, it should also assessed at three times the rate per unit. we are unable to accept the contention raised. clause 16.9 and 16.10.3 are separate and distinct clauses in the tariff. clause 16.9 lays down the formula for calculating the value of the electrical energy abstracted or consumed by a consumer by exceeding the contracted load or by creating obstruction in running of meter. part (iii) of this clause deals with method of charging the assessed units and sub-para (a) thereof lays down that the consumption so assessed shall be charged at thrice the rate per unit of the tariff applicable to the consumer excluding the consumption recorded by the meter and the latter shall be charged at the appropriate tariff rates. clause 16.10.3 is a separate clause which deals with fuel surcharge and it nowhere lays down that this additional surcharge will also be levied at thrice the rate per unit of the tariff. the two clauses namely 16.9 and 16.10.3 have to be read separately and there being no specific provision for assessing the fuel surcharge at thrice the rate per unit it is not possible to hold that in such a case the fuel surcharge should also be charged at thrice the rate per unit.18. we are, therefore, of the opinion that the view taken by the high court is perfectly correct and calls for no interference. in the result, both the appeals lack merit and are hereby dismissed. no costs.
h.l. dattu, c.j.i.1. leave granted.2. the issue that arises for our consideration and decision in the present appeals is whether an "official liquidator" is a "dealer" within the meaning of section 2(viii) of the kerala general sales tax act, 1963 (for short, "the act, 1963"), and therefore would be required to collect sales tax in respect of the sales effected by him pursuant to winding up proceedings of a company in liquidation.3. these appeals are directed against the judgment(s) and order(s) passed by the high court of kerala in m.f.a. no. 1394 of 2002, dated 11.02.2003, and in review petition no. 191 of 2003, dated 21.03.2003. the division bench of the high court in review confirmed the finding in m.f.a. no. 1394 of 2002 and concluded that the official liquidator is not a "dealer" under the act, 1963. however, by the impugned judgment, the high court has set aside the finding of the learned single judge which held that the machinery purchased in the auction sale conducted by the official liquidator is not be liable to be taxed under the act, 1963. the impugned judgment has further accepted a fresh plea raised by the appellant that the auction purchaser would be liable to pay purchase tax under section 5a of the act, 1963.4. it is relevant to state that respondent no. 1, that is, hindustan urban infrastructure ltd., had filed a separate appeal-civil appeal no. 5048 of 2003 against the specific finding of the high court in the impugned judgment with regard to the liability to pay purchase tax which was imposed upon the auction purchaser thereunder. this court has separately dealt with the aforesaid question by its order dated 04.09.2014 in the said civil appeal.facts:5. to appreciate the issues involved, it would be necessary to notice the facts leading up to the present appeals. m/s. premier cable company ltd. (for short, "the company"), was registered under the companies act, 1956 (for short, "the act, 1956"), and engaged in the manufacturing of pvc power cables, aluminium conductors, enameled wires, etc. pursuant to a recommendation by the board for industrial and financial reconstruction, (for short, "bifr"), the company was ordered to be wound up by an order passed by the high court in c.p. no. 2 of 1996, dated 18.06.1998. respondent no. 2, that is, the official liquidator attached to the high court was appointed to take charge of the assets and liabilities of the company and to deal with the same in accordance with the provisions of the act, 1956 and the rules framed thereunder.6. pursuant to the aforesaid order, the official liquidator issued a notice inviting tenders, in respect of the sale of assets of the company in liquidation, dated 26.11.2001. the aforesaid assets included land with factory building, workshop building, canteen building, godowns, quarters and other auxiliary buildings and also plant and machinery of the company in liquidation. the terms and conditions of the sale of the assets of the company expressly provided, inter alia, that such sale would be subject to confirmation by the high court and further subject to any subsequent terms and conditions as may be imposed by the high court.7. respondent no. 1-auction purchaser, in response to the notice inviting tenders issued by the official liquidator, offered to purchase lot nos. 1-2 for a total amount of rs. 5,76,00,000/- (rupees five crore seventy six lakh only), by an offer letter dated 18.12.2001. it was expressly stated therein that the said amount would be inclusive of all statutory levies such as sales tax, central sales tax, excise duty, etc., if any, as may be applicable. after accepting the offer so made, the official liquidator had placed the same before the learned judge dealing with the company matters for its confirmation.8. subsequent to the confirmation of the said sale, the auction purchaser, being desirous to transport the purchased assets across the border of multiple states, had requested the official liquidator to incorporate the relevant sales tax registration numbers in the sale invoices, vide letter dated 29.08.2002. by letter dated 03.09.2002, the official liquidator had declined to accede to the request so made.9. subsequently, the official liquidator filed an affidavit before the learned single judge of the high court, inter alia, stating that the official liquidator would neither be collecting nor be paying any cess or sales tax in respect of the sale effected by the respondent no. 2. it was stated that, in the opinion of the official liquidator, the auction purchaser should be directed by the high court to meet any expenses or liability towards payment of cess, sales tax, etc., if and when the same becomes payable.10. an application was also filed by the official liquidator, in the company petition before the learned singe judge, inter alia, seeking clarification on certain aspects of the matter including whether the auction purchaser would be liable to pay tax on the purchase of goods, pursuant to the auction conducted and further to direct the auction purchaser to pay any tax as may be leviable by the sales tax department. the learned single judge after considering the prayers made in the application has passed an order, in c.a. no. 293 of 2002 and c.a. no. 333 of 2002 in c.p. no. 2 of 1996, dated 30.10.2002, wherein it was held that the sale in question cannot be treated as a sale by the central government or by a registered dealer entitled to collect tax and further has observed that the auction purchaser cannot be treated as a dealer under the act, 1963 and further that the said sale in question would not be exigible to sales tax.11. the appellant, aggrieved by the order of the learned single judge, filed an appeal against the order dated 30.10.2002, inter alia, contending that the official liquidator would be bound to pay sales tax as and when a sale of the assets of the company in liquidation would be effected by him. the division bench of the high court by an order passed in m.f.a. no. 1394 of 2002, observed that the "official liquidator" would not fall within the definition of "dealer" under the act, 1963, dated 11.02.2003. accordingly the appeal was dismissed and the order of the learned single judge was confirmed.12. aggrieved by the aforesaid order dated 11.02.2003, the appellant filed review petition no. 191 of 2003 before the high court. in the review petition, a new plea was advanced by the appellant claiming that even if the official liquidator did not fall within the definition of dealer under the act, 1963, section 5a of the said act would be attracted insofar as the auction purchaser is concerned.13. by the impugned judgment(s) and order(s) passed in review petition no. 191 of 2003, dated 21.03.2003, the high court held that the official liquidator cannot be treated as a dealer under the act, 1963, and therefore it is not exigible for payment of sales tax. however, the court was of the view that the auction purchaser is liable to pay purchase tax under section 5a of the act, 1963.issues:14. the issues that arise for the consideration in the present appeals are firstly, whether the official liquidator is a "dealer" within the meaning of the act, 1963, and secondly, whether the official liquidator would be required to pay sales tax in respect of sales effected pursuant to a winding up proceedings.submissions:15. shri v. giri, learned counsel for the appellant, submits that the consistent stand taken by the revenue, is that the official liquidator is liable to pay sales tax on the transaction in question. he would state that the official liquidator was held to be a "dealer" under the act, 1963 by the learned single judge as well as by the division bench of the high court, and that it is only in review that the said finding was reversed. to support the decision of the learned single judge and the division bench of the high court, he would rely upon the definition of "dealer" as provided under the act, 1963 and submit that the official liquidator is an agent of the central government and therefore would deemed to be a dealer as provided under explanation 2 to section 2(viii)(f) of the act, 1963. to further substantiate his contention, he would refer to the statement filed, by the special government pleader (taxes), appearing for the sales tax authorities, before the learned single judge of the high court, wherein it was categorically stated that the official liquidator would be liable to pay tax at the relevant rate under the act, 1963, whether or not he had collected the same from the auction purchaser.16. shri c.s. rajan, learned counsel for the official liquidator-respondent no. 2, would support the findings of the high court in the review petition and state that the official liquidator would not be liable to pay any tax under the act, 1963. he would further state that the liability would in fact be on the auction purchaser who would be exigible to purchase tax under section 5a of the act, 1963.17. shri rajan would then elaborate upon the nature of the activities carried on by the official liquidator and submit that since an official liquidator is an officer of the court, he merely discharges statutory functions imposed upon him and therefore cannot be held liable to pay tax under the act, 1963. to support this submission, he would further refer to various provisions of the act, 1956 and the companies (court) rules, 1959 (for short, "the rules, 1959"). shri rajan would lastly submit that since the official liquidator discharges statutory functions of selling the assets of the company in liquidation, he cannot be perceived to be carrying on "business" as defined under the act, 1963 and thus cannot be exigible to tax.18. shri s.k. bagaria, learned senior counsel for the auction purchaser would submit that the question of payment of purchase tax could not arise because firstly, the contention was raised for the first time in the review petition, and secondly, the said tax is a single-point levy at the first point of sale. he would contend that the auction purchaser could not be made liable for a tax that was not even imposed or demanded by the competent authority. he would then contend that the official liquidator makes the sale on behalf of the company and not as the owner. lastly, shri bagaria would refer to rule 54 of the kerala general sales tax rules, 1963 (for short, "the rules, 1963") and section 17 of the central sales tax act, 1956 (for short, "the cst act") to demonstrate that the liability to pay sales tax was clearly on the official liquidator.19. we have heard the learned counsel for the parties to the lis and also carefully perused the orders passed by the courts and the forums below.20. the point for the consideration and decision of this court is whether the official liquidator is a "dealer" within the meaning of the act, 1963, and whether or not he would be required to pay sales tax in respect of sales effected by him pursuant to winding up proceedings.relevant provisions:21. to appreciate the arguments canvassed it is relevant to notice the relevant provisions. they are-sections 448, 456, 457 of the act, 1956; rules 232, 233 of the rules, 1959; sections 2(vi), 2(viii), 5, 5a, 22 of the act, 1963; and rule 54 of the rules, 1963. since these provisions have been amended from time to time, we have considered the provisions as they were in statute book during the relevant period.22. sections 448, 456, 457 of the act, 1956 deal with the appointment and powers of the official liquidator. section 448 of the act, 1956 provides for the appointment of an official liquidator for the purpose of winding up of a company. the official liquidator so appointed conducts the proceedings in the winding up of the company and performs other duties, as the court imposes upon him, in consonance with the provisions of the act, 1956. section 456 of the act, 1956 states that pursuant to a winding up order, the liquidator shall take into his custody or under his control, all the properties, effects and actionable claims to which the company is or appears to be entitled to. by the said provision, all the properties and effects of the company are deemed to be in the custody of the court, from the date of the winding up order. section 457 of the act, 1956 lists the powers of the official liquidator. the powers include, inter alia, to carry on business of the company for its beneficial winding up, to sell the immovable and movable property and actionable claims of the company, by public auction or private contract, and to do all things as may be necessary for winding up the affairs of the company and distribution of its assets. however, the powers conferred by virtue of the section 457 of the act, 1956, on the liquidator, are subject to the control of the court.23. in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 643 of the act, 1956, the rules, 1959 were enacted. the relevant rules regarding the collection and distribution of assets in a winding-up by court are found under rules 232 to 234 of the rules, 1959. rule 232 deals with the powers of the official liquidator. as per the rule, the duties imposed on the court under section 467(1) of the act, 1956 concerning the collection of the assets of the company and the application of the assets in discharge of the company's liabilities must be discharged by the official liquidator as an officer of the court. the discharge of the aforesaid functions would be subject to the control of the court and to the proviso in section 643(2) of the act, 1956. rule 233 states that in discharge of the duties imposed upon the official liquidator, pursuant to section 467(1) of the act, 1956, and for the purpose of acquiring and retaining possession of the property of the company, he must be treated as a receiver of the property appointed by the court.24. section 2 of the act, 1963 provides for the meaning of certain expressions in the said act. section 2(vi) defines "business" as follows:(vi) "business" includes:(a) any trade, commerce or manufacture or any adventure or concern in the nature of trade, commerce, or manufacture, whether or not such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern is carried on with a motive to make gain or profit and whether or not any profit accrues from such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern; and(b) any transaction in connection with, or incidental or ancillary to such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern;25. section 2(viii) of the act, 1963 deals with the definition of the term 'dealer' as under:(viii) "dealer" means any person who carries on the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods, executing works contract, transferring the right to use any goods or supplying by way of or as part of any service, any goods directly or otherwise, whether for cash or for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration and includes,-(a) [omitted](b) a casual trader;(c) x x x x(d) x x x x(e) x x x x(f) a person who whether in the course of business or not:(1) transfers any goods, including controlled goods whether in pursuance of a contract or not, for cash or deferred payment or other valuable consideration;(2) transfers property in goods (whether as goods or in some other form) involved in the execution of a works contract;(3) delivers any goods on hire-purchase or any system of payment by installments;(4) transfers the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration;(5) supplies, by way of or as part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, goods, being food or any other articles for human consumption or any drink (whether or not intoxicating), where such supply or service is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration;explanation: (1) a society including a cooperative society, club or firm or an association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not) which whether or not in the course of business, buys, sells, supplies or distributes goods from or to its members for cash or for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, shall be deemed to be a dealer for the purposes of this act;explanation: (2) the central government or a state government, which whether or not in the course of business, buy, sell, supply or distribute goods, directly or otherwise, for cash or for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, shall be deemed to be a dealer for the purposes of this act.(g) a bank or a financing institution, which, whether in the course of its business or not, sells any gold or other valuable article pledged with it to secure any loan, for the realisation of such loan amount.explanation i: bank for the purposes of this clause includes a nationalized bank or a schedule bank or a co-operative bank;explanation ii: financing institution means a financing institution other than a bank;26. on perusal of the aforementioned definitions, it would appear that the term "business" has been given a broad meaning by including within its ambit both incidental and ancillary transactions. further, it has also eliminated the requirement of a profit motive as being an essential component. the definition of "dealer" has also been given a wide ambit. it includes any person carrying on business of, inter alia, buying, selling, supply or distribution of goods, whether directly or otherwise. all modes of payment whether by way of cash, commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration have been included therein. it also includes, inter alia, a casual trader, a non-resident dealer, a commission agent, a broker, an auctioneer and other mercantile agents. sub-section (f) of the definition further expands the scope of the provision by including within its ambit, an array of transactions, which may or may not be in the course of business. section 2(viii)(f)(1) expressly includes, within the definition of a "dealer", a person who whether in the course of business or not transfers any goods, whether in the pursuance of a contract or not, for cash or deferred payment.27. section 5 of the act, 1963 is the charging provision under the said act and provides for the levy of tax on the sale and purchase of goods. it provides that every dealer, whose total turnover for that year is not less than rs. 2,00,000/-, would be liable to pay tax as per rates and at points as specified in the schedules to the act, 1963. the first schedule to the act, 1963 would be relevant for the purpose of the present appeal. serial no. 84 of the said schedule deals with, inter alia, machinery and it provides that the point of levy shall be at the point of first sale in the state by a dealer who is liable to tax under section 5 of the act, 1963.28. section 5a of the act, 1963 is the charging provision as regard to the imposition of purchase tax. under the said provision, the purchaser of any goods which may be consumed, used, disposed or dispatched to any place outside the state from a registered dealer will incur liability for payment of purchase tax. the provision amply clarifies that purchase tax would be applicable only in circumstances in which no tax is payable under sub-sections (1), (3), (4) or (5) of section 5 of the act, 1963.29. the rules, 1963, have been enacted in exercise of the powers conferred by section 57 of the act, 1963. rule 54 of the rules, 1963, reads as follows:54. liability of court of wards, official trustee etc.-in the case of business, owned by a dealer whose estate or any portion of whose estate is under the control of court of wards, the administrator general, the official trustee or any receiver or manager (including any person whatever be his designation, who in fact manages the business on behalf of the dealer) appointed by, or, under any order of a court, the tax shall be levied upon and recoverable from such court of wards, administrator general, official trustee, receiver or manager in like manner and on the same terms as it would be leviable upon and recoverable from the dealer if he were conducting the business himself, and all the provisions of the act and rules made there under shall apply accordingly.30. the aforementioned rule contemplates a scenario wherein a business, owned by a dealer, is under the control of, inter alia, the official trustee or receiver or manager, including any other person who manages the business of the said dealer, who is appointed by an order of a court. in such an event, tax would be recoverable from such a person who controls the business of the dealer in the same or like manner, as would have been recoverable from the dealer itself.discussion:31. at the outset, it would be necessary to make reference to the statement/affidavit filed by the special government pleader (taxes), appearing for the revenue, before the learned single judge of the high court. in the said statement/affidavit, the revenue has stated that a sale by the official liquidator, whether by auction or otherwise, is a sale by the central government and therefore the official liquidator becomes a dealer under the act, 1963. it was further stated that although tax may be collected only by a registered dealer, the central government is empowered to collect tax in the manner a registered dealer is entitled to. the revenue, in its conclusion therein, has stated that the official liquidator would be liable to pay tax at the relevant rate, whether he had collected the same or not.32. to appreciate the stand of the revenue, it would be profitable to refer to section 2(viii) of the act, 1963 which defines the expression "dealer" as any person who carries on the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods, executing works contract, transferring right to use any goods or supplying by way of or as part of any service, any goods directly or indirectly. the aforementioned activities are carried out for the payment of consideration, in the form of cash, deferred payment, commission, remuneration, etc. thus, the emphasis under this clause of "carrying on business" is to be understood in a wide sense and not merely restricted to the activity of buying and selling.33. the expression "business" has been given a wide and inclusive definition, whereby 'any business, trade, commerce or manufacture or any activity of the said nature, whether or not it is carried on with a motive for profit' has been expressly included. it further includes any transaction in connection with such trade, commerce, etc. including within its purview, all ancillary or incidental activities in connection with any trade, commerce, etc.34. section 2(viii)(f) further expands the definition of "dealer" enabling a far wider class of persons to fall within its ambit. it includes any person who transfers any goods, transfers property in goods involved in the execution of a works contract, delivers any goods on hire purchase or any system of payment by installments, transfers the right to use any goods for any purpose and lastly, any food or beverage supplier or service provider, fit for human consumption. the explanation 1 to sub-clause (f) includes a society, club, firm or an association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not. explanation 2 includes the central government, state government and any of its apparatus within the scope of this section.35. therefore, given the exceptionally wide scope of the definition, prima facie, it can be concluded that any person or entity that carries on any activity of selling goods, could be categorized as a "dealer" under the act, 1963. to test the aforesaid conclusion in the context of the issue at hand, we would delve into the interpretation ascribed by this court to the term "dealer". a careful reading of the definition of "dealer" under the act, 1963, would make it evident that the legislature intended to provide for an inclusive criterion and broaden the ambit of the said classification. the legislature did not propose to restrict the scope of the term as perceived in common parlance.36. the definition of a dealer under various sales tax legislations has been given a wide import by several decisions of this court. in chowringhee sales bureau (p) ltd. v. cit manu/sc/0323/1972manu/sc/0323/1972 : (1973) 1 scc 46, inter alia, a challenge was made to the explanation to the definition of "dealer" under the bengal finance (sales tax) act, 1941 on the ground that is sought to levy a tax on a person who is neither a seller nor a purchaser. a three-judge bench of this court, rejecting the said challenge, held that the term "dealer" would include an auctioneer who carries on the business of selling and who has in the customary course of business authority to sell goods belonging to the principal. it was further observed that the given explanation sought to tax a transaction of sale of goods. it was held that, a statutory provision providing for a levy of sales tax on a person such as an auctioneer, would be permissible, if there is a close and direct connection between the transaction of sale and the person made liable for the payment of sales tax.37. in state of u.p. v. union of india manu/sc/0073/2003manu/sc/0073/2003 : (2003) 3 scc 239, this court held that the central government, when involved in the business of buying and selling, could be treated as a "dealer" under the u.p. sales tax act, 1940. the court observed as follows:11. ...it is thus clear that in regard to a transfer of the right to use any goods both a person and a government will be within the ambit of the definition of "dealer" subject to the following distinction: a person to be a "dealer" should carry on the business of buying, selling etc., whether regularly or otherwise, but a government which buys, sells etc. (whether in the course of business or otherwise) will be a "dealer" for purposes of the u.p. act. inasmuch as the definition of "sale" includes any transfer of property in the goods and a transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose, dot which engages in transfer of right to use any goods will be a "dealer" within the meaning of sub-clause (iv) of clause (c) of section 2 of the u.p. act.38. in state of t.n. v. shakti estates manu/sc/0562/1989manu/sc/0562/1989 : (1989) 1 scc 636, this court while ascertaining whether the assessee could be treated as a dealer gave a wide import to the term under the tamil nadu general sales tax act, 1959. the court observed as follows:10. moreover, we have also to give full effect to the definitions in the statute we are concerned with. the definition of a "business" also includes "any transaction in connection with or incidental to or ancillary" to a trade and thus, even on the assessees' own arguments, these activities were incidental and ancillary to the business which the assessee was carrying on or definitely intended to carry on. it is also immaterial, on this definition that the assessees may not have had a "motive of making a profit or gain" on these sales though on the facts, it is clear that such motive must have existed and, in any event, could not be ruled out. the reference to a "casual" dealer in the second definition also renders it immaterial that the assessees may not have intended to be regular dealers in sleepers, timber, firewood or charcoal but that this was something casual or incidental to the acquisition and exploitation of a forest for running a plantation.39. in state of t.n. v. m.k. kandaswami manu/sc/0455/1975manu/sc/0455/1975 : (1975) 4 scc 745, this court while determining the interpretation of the term "dealer" under the madras general sales tax act, 1959 gave a broad interpretation to include a person who not only carries on business of "selling, supplying or distributing" goods but also the one who carries on the business of "buying" only.40. in karya palak engineer, cpwd v. rajasthan taxation board manu/sc/0624/2004manu/sc/0624/2004 : (2004) 7 scc 195, this court held that a contractor, despite not being the owner but merely the custodian of the goods, as a dealer under the rajasthan sales tax act, 1994.41. in state of orissa v. titaghur paper mills co. ltd. manu/sc/0325/1985manu/sc/0325/1985 : 1985 supp scc 280, while ascertaining whether the central government or its agents could be treated as be "dealer", this court observed as follows:26. what is pertinent to note about the new definition of "dealer" is that in the case of the central government, a state government or any of their employees acting in official capacity on behalf of such government, it is not necessary that the purchase, sale, supply or distribution of goods should be in the course of business, while in all other cases for a person to be a dealer he must be carrying on the business of purchasing, selling, supplying or distributing goods.42. in food corporation of india v. state of kerala manu/sc/0282/1997manu/sc/0282/1997 : (1997) 3 scc 410, this court was ascertaining whether the procurement of food grains by the food corporation of india, pursuant to levy orders could amount to sale or purchase to incur sales/purchase tax liability as levied by the states. this court held that since there was no statutory compulsion in the matter of sale or purchase of fertilizers and parties had the discretion to enter into consensual contractual agreements subject minimal restrictions such as price fixation, quota requirements, etc., there is no hesitation in holding that the activity of distribution of fertilizers, pursuant to levy orders would amount to sale which is eligible to incur tax liability. this court stated that supply or distribution of goods need not be in course of business to be considered a sale.43. thus, on perusal of the aforesaid decisions of this court, we are of the view that the definition of "dealer" under various sales tax legislations has been given a broad and inclusive interpretation. it would be gainsaid to state that such a broad and expansive interpretation is in consonance with what the legislature intended with regard to imposing sales tax liability on all transactions of sale of goods. therefore, it can be concluded that the definition of a "dealer" under the act, 1963, would include persons, if they are involved in carrying on any business or trading activity, such as the sale of machinery as in the present case. therefore, as a necessary sequitur, the company in liquidation, whose assets are sold by way of an auction, would be a "dealer" under the act, 1963.44. section 5 of the act, 1963 is the charging provision with regard to imposition of sales tax. it envisages levy of tax on sale or purchase of goods by a dealer. section 5(1) of the act, 1963 imposes liability on every dealer whose total turnover for one year is not less than two lakh rupees. section 5(1)(i) enumerates tax liability in case of goods specified in the first or second schedule to the act, 1963 at the rates and only at the points specified against such goods in the said schedules. serial no. 84(i) of the first schedule stipulates the rate of tax payable on sale of, inter alia, machinery. in this regard, the point of levy of sales tax is at the point of first sale in the state by a dealer who is liable to tax under section 5 of the act, 1963.45. thus, pursuant to section 5 of the act, 1963, in the case of goods specified in the first and second schedule, the single point tax could be levied only at the rates and points specified against such goods in the said schedules. the first schedule specifies that the point of levy of tax for the goods in question could be only at the point of first sale in the state by a dealer. in the instant case, the dealer under the act, 1963 would be liable to pay sales tax for the machinery sold at the point of first sale, as per section 5 read with the first schedule of the act, 1963. in light of the above, we are of the considered opinion that the transaction in question in the present appeal would be exigible to tax under section 5(1) of the act, 1963.46. section 5-a of the act, 1963 stipulates certain situations wherein purchase tax could be imposed on any dealer who purchases any goods, either from a registered dealer or from any other person, the sale or purchase of which is liable to tax under act, 1963. the aforesaid provision however will apply only in circumstances when no tax is payable under sub-sections (1), (3), (4), (5) of section 5. however, as noticed hereinabove, the given transaction is exigible to tax under section 5(1) of the act, 1963, and therefore tax liability under section 5a of the act, 1963 would not apply to the said transaction.47. before delving into whether the official liquidator could also be treated as a "dealer" under the act, 1963, it would be apposite to take into account the powers of the official liquidator, as provided under the act, 1956. the official liquidator, in generic terms, is an officer appointed to conduct the proceedings and to assist the court in the winding up of a company.48. in a. ramaiya, guide to the companies act, 16th edition (2004), while interpreting the powers of the official liquidator under section 457 of the act, 1956 observed as follows:a liquidator is an agent employed for the purpose of winding up of the company. his principal duties are to take possession of assets, to make out the requisite lists of contributors and of creditors, to have disputed cases adjudicated upon, to realise the assets subject to the control of the court in certain matters and to apply the proceeds on the payments of the company's debts and liabilities in due course of administration, and having done that, to divide the surplus amongst the contributories and to adjust their rights.49. section 457(3) of the act, 1956 expressly states that the powers of the liquidator are subject to control by the court. the powers conferred upon the liquidator can be exercised by him alone and he cannot authorise any other person to exercise those powers. the expression 'control by court' was discussed by this court in navlakha and sons v. ramanuja das manu/sc/0614/1969manu/sc/0614/1969 : (1969) 3 scc 537, wherein it was observed that when the liquidator exercises or proposes to exercise any of the powers, a creditor or contributory may apply to the court with respect of such exercise. it is the duty of the court to safeguard the interests of the company and its creditors and satisfy itself with the adequacy of the price fetched. it may also be appropriate to consider rule 232 of the rules, 1959 which enumerates the duty of an official liquidator in the collection and application of the assets of the company, which is discharged by him as an officer of the court.50. in the case of hari prasad jayantilal and co. v. v.s. gupta, income tax officer, ahmedabad and anr. manu/sc/0144/1965manu/sc/0144/1965 : air 1966 sc 1481, this court held that the liquidator is merely an agent of the company to administer its property for the purposes prescribed by the act, 1956. the court held that while distributing the assets, including accumulated profits, the liquidator acts merely as an agent or administrator for and on behalf of the company. the court observed as follows:7. ...the property of the company does not vest in the liquidator: it continues to remain vested in the company. on the appointment of a liquidator, all the powers of the board of directors and of the managing or whole-time directors, managing agents, secretaries and treasurers cease (section 491), and the liquidator may exercise the powers mentioned in section 512, including the power to did such things as may be necessary for winding up the affairs of the company and distributing its assets. the liquidator appointed in a members' winding up is merely an agent of the company to administer the property of the company for purpose prescribed by the statute. in distributing the assets including accumulated profits the liquidator acts merely as an agent or administrator for and on behalf of the company.51. in ajay g. podar v. official liquidator of j.s. and w.m. and ors. manu/sc/7858/2008manu/sc/7858/2008 : (2008) 14 scc 17, this court considered the question pertaining to bar of limitation under the act, 1956 for misfeasance proceedings filed by the official liquidator. while discussing the powers of the official liquidator under section 457(1) of the act, 1956, the court was of the view that the official liquidator must be authorised to take steps for recovery of assets by the company court under the winding up order and the said proceedings must be initiated in the name of the company and on behalf of the company to be wound up. this court had further opined that the official liquidator derives his authority from the provisions of the act, 1956.52. it would be beneficial to notice the views of courts in england insofar as powers of the official liquidator during winding up proceedings. in re mesco properties manu/ukwa/0017/1979 : (1980) 1 all er 117, the court of appeal was ascertaining as to whether a company could incur tax liability in consequence of the realization of its assets after a winding up order was passed and whether the official liquidator was the proper officer to incur such liability. the court, in the re mesco properties case (supra), at p. 120, observed as follows:...it must, in my view, be open to a liquidator to apply to the court for guidance upon the question whether, if he discharges a certain liability of the company in liquidation, the payment will be a necessary disbursement within the meaning of rule 195. that is what the liquidator is doing in this case. the company is liable for the tax which is due. the tax ought to be paid. the liquidator is the proper officer to pay it. when he pays it, he will clearly make a disbursement. in my judgment it will be a necessary disbursement within the meaning of the rule. moreover common sense and justice seem to me to require that it should be discharged in full in priority to the unsecured creditors, and to any expenses which rank lower in priority under rule 195. the tax is a consequence of the realisation of the assets in the course of the winding up of the company. that realisation was a necessary step in the liquidation; that is to say, in the administration of the insolvent estate. the fact that in the event there may be nothing available for the unsecured creditors does not, in my view, mean that the realisation was not a step taken in the interests of all who have claims against the company. those claims must necessarily be met out of the available assets in due order of priority. superior claims may baulk inferior ones, but the liquidator's duty is to realise the assets for the benefit of all in accordance with their rights. if in consequence of the realisation, the company incurs a liability, the discharge of such liability must, in my judgment, constitute a charge or expense incurred in the winding up within section 267 of the companies act 1948 and must also, in my view, fall within rule 195.53. further, the house of lords in ayerst (inspector of taxes) v. c and k (construction) ltd. (1975) 2 all er 537, held that a company, pursuant to a winding up order, ceases to have the custody and control of its assets which are thereafter administered exclusively for the benefit of those persons who are entitled to share in the proceeds of realisation of the assets. the house of lords elaborately discussed the role of the official liquidator in this regard and observed, at p. 177, as follows:the functions of the liquidator are thus similar to those of a trustee (formerly official assignee) in bankruptcy or an executor in the administration of an estate of a deceased person. there is, however, this difference: that whereas the legal title in the property of the bankrupt vests in the trustee and the legal title to property of the deceased vests in the executor, a winding-up order does not of itself divest the company of the legal title to any of its assets. though this is not expressly stated in the act it is implicit in the language used throughout part v, particularly in sections 243 to 246 which relate to the powers of liquidators and refer to 'property... to which the company is... entitled,' to 'property... belonging to the company,' to 'assets... of the company' and to acts to be done by the liquidator 'in the name and on behalf of the company.54. in light of the aforesaid, we would conclude that an official liquidator-(i) derives its authority from the provisions of the act, 1956; (ii) acts on behalf of the company in liquidation for the purposes prescribed by the act, 1956; (iii) is appointed by and is under the control and supervision of the court while discharging his duties.55. having determined the status of an official liquidator under the act, 1963, it would now be appropriate for this court to look into the nature of liability, if any, imposed on the official liquidator for the purposes of taxation. for this purpose, we require to consider rule 54 of the rules, 1963 which imposes liability, inter alia, on a receiver or manager or other person appointed by an order of the court, in the event that a business owned by a dealer, is under the control of the said receiver or manager or person, whatever be his designation, who in fact manages the business on behalf of the dealer. the aforesaid rule expressly provides that tax shall be levied upon and recoverable from such receiver, manager, etc., in the same manner, as it would be leviable upon and recoverable from the dealer. such tax liability may be incurred by any person managing or conducting the business on behalf of the dealer. the tax liability incurred by such person will be equivalent to the liability which would be levied upon the dealer if he were conducting such business. further that under rule 233 of the rules, 1959, for the purposes of acquiring and retaining possession of the property of the company in liquidation, the official liquidator would be in the same position as a receiver.56. since the official liquidator is akin to an agent employed for the purpose of winding up of a company, he steps into the shoes of the directors of the said company for the purposes of discharging the statutory functions of an official liquidator. thus, during the said proceedings, the directors cease to exercise any functions from the date on which the official liquidator is appointed and all powers and functions for carrying on the business of the company thereafter vest with the official liquidator.57. having glanced through the settled principles of law, we would revert back to the controversy in the present appeals. the first issue canvassed before this court by the learned counsel for the parties to the lis, is whether the official liquidator herein would fall under the purview of a "dealer" as defined under the act, 1963. and secondly, whether the official liquidator would be liable to pay sales tax in respect of sales effected by him pursuant to winding up proceedings.58. in the present case, the official liquidator had issued a notice inviting tenders for the sale of the assets of the company. the offer of the auction purchaser was accepted and duly confirmed by the high court. however, the dispute herein arose in respect to determination of which party would be exigible to sales tax.59. from the discussion in the preceding paragraphs, we can conclude an official liquidator is an officer of the court and that for the purpose of discharging statutory obligations imposed under the act, 1956, the official liquidator merely steps into the shoes of the company in liquidation. by virtue of the notice issued by the official liquidator for inviting tenders, dated 26.11.2001, it is amply evident that the liquidator intended to conduct a transfer of the said goods in liquidation. since the conduct of an auctioned sale involved transfer of goods, it falls within the wide ambit of section 2(viii)(f) of the act, 1963.60. the observation of the court of appeals in the re mesco properties case (supra), would appear to be squarely applicable to be present factual matrix, that is, during a winding up proceedings, if tax requires to be collected from the company in liquidation, the liquidator would be the proper officer to pay the same.61. this court has noticed hereinabove that the company in liquidation is a "dealer" with regard to the sale of its assets by way of an auction under a winding up order. further, we have noticed the settled law that an official liquidator steps into the shoes of the director of the company in liquidation and performs his statutory functions in accordance with the directives of the court. furthermore, rule 54 of the rules, 1963 contemplates a situation where a business owned by a dealer, is under the control of a receiver or manager or any other person, irrespective of his designation, who manages the business on behalf of the said dealer. in the said scenario, the said person, in-charge of the business on behalf of the dealer, would be exigible to sales tax in the same manner as it would have been leviable upon and recoverable from the dealer itself. therefore, it can be concluded that the liability to pay sales tax, in the present case, would be on the official liquidator in the same manner as the dealer, that is, the company in liquidation.62. pursuant to section 5 of the act, 1963, the company in liquidation, as a dealer, will incur liability to pay sales tax at the point of first sale as incurred by any other dealer under the said act. by placing reliance upon rule 54 of the rules, 1963, the liability to pay sales tax is borne by the official liquidator as a manager or receiver of the property of the company in liquidation. therefore, we are of the considered opinion that the official liquidator would be required to pay the tax payable on the sale of the assets of the company in liquidation.63. as regards the liability of the auction purchaser, this court, in an order passed in civil appeal no. 5048 of 2003, has observed that in view of facts and circumstances of the case, the auction purchaser would not be liable to pay sales tax. the offer of the auction purchaser, as accepted by the official liquidator and confirmed by the high court, was inclusive of all taxes. it would have been the bounden duty of the official liquidator to have separated an amount for the payment of taxes under the act, 1963 to avoid any liability. it would be gainsaid in repeating that the special government pleader (taxes), on behalf of the revenue, before the learned single judge of the high court had clearly stated that the liability to pay sales tax would be on the official liquidator.64. in the result, we allow these appeals and set aside the impugned judgments and orders passed by the high court.ordered accordingly.
dipak misra, j.1. the present appeals, by special leave, assail the judgment and order dated 17.7.2013 in lpa no. 1070/1998 whereby the division bench of the high court has opined that against the order of the learned single judge under article 227 of the constitution of india, an intra-court appeal is not maintainable, and also question the defensibility of judgment and order dated 30.7.1998 passed by the learned single judge in special civil application no. 7469 of 1997 whereunder he has concurred with the award passed by the labour court which had, on the strength of a compromise entered into by the sarpanch of nava naroda gram panchayat, the 2nd respondent with the workman and on that basis had directed his reinstatement in service on the post of a clerk with full back wages.2. at the outset, it is necessary to clarify that we are not disposed to dwell upon the maintainability of the letters patent appeal before the division bench as that issue would be addressed separately in other cases. it is also apposite to mention here that the orders have been assailed by the gram panchayat as well as by the ahmedabad municipal corporation (for short, 'the corporation'), for both had preferred the intra-court appeal assailing the award of the labour court as well as the judgment and order of the learned single judge. be that as it may, as the panchayat has preferred the appeal, it requires to be addressed on merits.3. the factual score which is necessary to be depicted are that the 1st respondent was appointed as a 'mukadam' with the gram panchayat vide order dated 21.5.1995. he was dismissed from service by oral order dated 23.1.1996. the said order of dismissal constrained the first respondent to raise an industrial dispute vide reference no. 531 of 1996 before the labour court, ahmedabad. no written statement was filed before the labour court, but a compromise was entered into between the workman and the sarpanch stating, inter alia, that the workman was working as a clerk in the gram panchayat and he would be reinstated in service on the post of clerk with continuous service and would be entitled to get all future benefits and further whatever amount is payable towards the post of clerk, would be paid in three monthly instalments and his service would be continuous.4. the legal acceptability of the award was assailed by the gram panchayat on the ground that the sarpanch had entered into a compromise with the workman without any authority from the gram panchayat and, therefore, the award passed by the labour court was null and void. it was urged that in the absence of any resolution by the gram panchayat, the compromise and the consequent award were absolutely unsustainable and deserved to be axed in exercise of writ jurisdiction by the high court. the learned single judge by the impugned order dated 30.7.1998 considering the submission opined that there was no mention in the writ petition that the said compromise was entered into by the village sarpanch on account of any fraud or misrepresentation or undue influence; that when the gram panchayat was made a party and the sarpanch was representing the said panchayat, the sarpanch was entitled under section 55 of the gujarat panchayats act, 1993 (for brevity, "the act"), to sign the compromise; that the sarpanch being the chief officer is the employer of the workman as per sub-clause 2 to section 2(g) of the industrial disputes act, 1947 and hence, the compromise executed between him and the workman was valid and legally enforceable; that while interpreting the award on the strength of compromise, it was open to the panchayat to reinstate him on the post of mukadam, the post which he was holding at the time of his retrenchment and that when there was admission in respect of the compromise before the labour court, there was no illegality in the award passed by the labour court. being of this view, the learned single judge dismissed the writ petition.5. the gram panchayat and the corporation preferred the intra-court appeal and as has been stated hereinbefore, the division bench relying on a full bench decision of the high court in revaben wd/o ambalal motibhai and ors. v. vinubhai purshottambhai patel and ors. manu/gj/1352/2013manu/gj/1352/2013 : 2013 (1) glh 440, ruled that the appeal was not maintainable. hence, an appeal has been preferred against the order passed by the division bench and another appeal questioning the justifiability of the order passed by the labour court that has been affirmed by the learned single judge.6. as has been clarified earlier, we are not delving into the issue whether the intra-court appeal was maintainable or not. we shall only address to the correctness of the award passed by the labour court and the soundness of the judgment and order passed by the learned single judge concurring with the same. there is no cavil over the fact that the award has been passed by the labour court on the basis of a compromise entered into between the sarpanch of the gram panchayat and the workman. ms. hemantika wahi, learned counsel appearing for the appellant has raised a singular contention that the sarpanch could not have entered into a compromise without the authority, that is, a resolution passed by the gram panchayat.7. we have heard ms. hemantika wahi, learned counsel for the appellant and mr. o.p. bhadani learned counsel for the respondent.8. the singular question that emerges for consideration is whether the sarpanch while representing the concerned gram panchayat could have entered into a compromise on behalf of the gram panchayat without a proper resolution of the gram panchayat. the said issue has to be appreciated in the backdrop of the provisions of the act. section 55 of the act enumerates the executive functions of sarpanch and upa-sarpanch. the relevant part of the said provision is reproduced below:55. executive functions of sarpanch and upa-sarpanch.-(1) save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this act, the executive power, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this act and the resolutions passed by a village panchayat shall vest in the sarpanch thereof who shall be directly responsible for the due fulfillment of the duties imposed upon the panchayat by or under this act. in the absence of the sarpanch his powers and duties shall, save as may be otherwise prescribed by rules, be exercised and performed by the upa-sarpanch.(2) without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision:(a) the sarpanch shall-(i) preside over and regulate the meetings of the panchayat;(ii) exercise supervision and control over the acts done and actions taken by all officers and servants of the panchayat;(iii) incur contingent expenditure upto fifty rupees at any one occasion;(iv) operate on the fund of the panchayat including authorization of payment, issue of cheques and refunds;(v) be responsible for the safe custody of the fund of the panchayat;(vi) cause to prepare all statements and reports required by or under this act;(vii) exercise such other powers and discharge such other functions as may be conferred or imposed upon him by this act or rules made thereunder.the aforesaid provision, as is perceptible, confers certain powers on the sarpanch for carrying out the purpose of provisions of the act and the resolutions passed by village panchayat and he shall be directly responsible for the due fulfillment of the duties imposed upon the panchayat by or under the act. that apart, the powers that have been mentioned in sub-section (1) is qualified by the words "save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this act". sub-section (2) stipulates that without prejudice to the generality of the provision contained in sub-section (1), the sarpanch has been given certain powers.9. having mentioned the powers of the sarpanch, it is necessary to appreciate how a village panchayat functions under the act. section 2(14) defines "panchayat" which means a village panchayat, taluka panchayat or district panchayat. section 3 deals with establishment of panchayats on different tiers. the said provision reads as follows:3. establishment of panchayats of different tiers.- for the purpose of this act, there shall be in each district-(1) a village panchayat for each village.(2) a taluka panchayat for each taluka.(3) a district panchayat for each district.10. section 4 provides for a gram sabha for a village performing such functions as provided by or under the act. section 5 stipulates that a village panchayat shall be a body corporate. chapter v of the act provides for conduct of business, administrative powers and duties, property and fund accounts, etc. of panchayat. part i pertains to provisions relating to village panchayat. under the heading (a) conduct of business finds mention. section 96 deals with questions to be decided by majority of votes. it reads as follows:96. questions to be decided by majority of votes.- all questions before a meeting of a panchayat or committee thereof or of a gram sabha shall be decided by a majority of votes of the members present and unless otherwise provided in this act, the presiding officer of the meeting shall have a second or casting vote in all cases of equality of votes:provided that in such circumstances and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, a decision on any question before a panchayat or committee thereof may be taken by circulating the propositions therefore for the vote of members.under caption (b) administrative powers and duties have been prescribed. section 99 which deals with administrative powers of panchayat reads as follows:administrative powers of panchayats.- subject to the provisions of this act it shall be the duty of each panchayat to make in the area within its jurisdiction, and so far as the fund at its disposal will allow, reasonable provisions in regard to all or any of the matters specified in schedule i.section 100 provides for other functions of panchayat. it is as follows:100. other functions of panchayats.- (1) a panchayat may with the previous sanction of the district panchayat, incur expenditure on education or medical relief outside its jurisdiction if its finances permit.(2) a panchayat may also make provision for carrying out in the areas, within the limits of its jurisdiction any other work or measure which is likely to promote.-(a) the health, safety, comfort or convenience,(b) social, economic or cultural well being; and(c) education including secondary education of the inhabitants of the areas.(3) a panchayat may, by resolution passed at its meeting and supported by two-thirds of the whole number of members make provisions for any public reception, ceremony or entertainment in the area within its jurisdiction or may make contribution towards an annual gathering or such other gathering of panchayats in the district or the state or towards the fund of any institution which is established with the object of promoting the spirit of community, self-help and mutual aid among village folk and suggesting ways and means for the efficient administration of panchayats and which is recognized by the state government:provided that except with the previous sanction of the panchayat to which it is subordinate under section 6, the panchayat shall not incur expenditure exceeding one hundred rupees on any such reception, ceremony, entertainment or gathering.(4) if in respect of any land it comes to the notice of a panchayat that on account of the neglect of the occupant or superior holder thereof or dispute between him and his tenant, the cultivation of the land has seriously suffered the panchayat may bring such fact to the notice of the competent authority.(5) a panchayat shall, in regard to the measures for the amelioration of the condition of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes and other backward classes, and in particular, in the removal of untouchability, carry out the directions of orders given or issued in this regard from time to time by the state government or the competent authority and in case the panchayat fails to carry out any direction or order so given or issued, it shall be lawful for the state government to withhold the payment to the panchayat of all or any of the grants payable under chapter xi after the panchayat has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.(6) a panchayat shall perform other duties and functions as are entrusted to it by or under any other law for the time being in force.(7) it shall be lawful for a panchayat to render financial or other assistance to any person for carrying on in the village panchayat any activity which is related to any of the matters specified in schedule i.11. we have referred to the aforesaid provisions to show the nature of powers conferred upon the authorities and how they are to be exercised. section 101 specifically deals with the power to compromise which is extracted below:101. power to compromise(1) a village panchayat may compromise in respect of any suit instituted by or against it, or in respect of any claim or demand arising out of any contract entered into by it under this act, for such sum of money or other compensation as it shall deem sufficient:provided that if any sanction in the making of any contract is required by this act, the like previous sanction shall be obtained for compromising any claim or demand arising out of such contract.(2) the panchayat may give compensation out of its fund to any person sustaining any damage by reason of the exercise of any of the powers vested in it and its officers and servants under this act.12. on a plain reading of the aforesaid provision it is graphically clear that specific power has been given to enter into a compromise in respect of suits and certain claims but the said power is to some extent curbed by the proviso. be that as it may, the power is conferred for entering into any compromise on the village panchayat.13. in this context section 227 occurring in chapter xiii that deals with provisions relating to services is significant to be taken note of. section 227 deals with panchayat service to be regulated by rules. to appreciate the controversy we think it apposite to reproduce section 227:227. panchayat service to be regulated by rules.- (1) for the purpose of bringing about uniform scales of pay and uniform conditions of service for persons employed in the discharge of functions and duties of panchayats, there shall be constituted a panchayat service in connection with the affairs of panchayats. such service shall be distinct from the state service.(2) the panchayat service shall consist of such classes, cadres and posts and the initial strength of officers and servants in each such class and cadre shall be such, as the state government may, by order from time to time determine:provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent a district panchayat from altering, with the previous approval of the state government any class, cadre or number of posts so determined by the state government.(3)(a) the cadres referred to in sub-section (2) may consists of district cadres, taluka cadres and local cadres.(b) a servant belonging to a district cadre shall be liable to be posted whether by promotion or transfer to any post in any taluka in the district.(c) a servant belonging to a taluka cadre shall be liable to be posted whether by promotion or transfer to any post in any village in the same taluka.(d) a servant belonging to a local cadre shall be liable to be posted whether by promotion or transfer to any post in the same village.(4) in addition to the posts in the cadres referred to in sub-section (3), a panchayat may have such other posts of such classes as the state government may by general or special order determine. such posts shall be called "deputation posts" and shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of section 231.(5) subject to the provisions of this act, the state government may make rules regulating the mode or recruitment either by holding examinations or otherwise and conditions of service or persons appointed to the panchayat service and the powers in respect of appointments, transfers and promotions of officers and servants in the panchayats service and disciplinary action against any such officers or servants.(6) rules made under sub-section (5) shall in particular contain-(a) a provision entitling servants of such cadres in the panchayat service to promotion to such cadres in the state service as may be prescribed;(b) a provision specifying the classes of posts recruitment to which shall be made through the district panchayat service selection committee and the classes of posts, recruitment to which shall be made by the gujarat panchayat service selection board, and(c) a provision regarding the percentage of vacancies to be reserved for the members of scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and other backward classes in the panchayat service.(7) such rules may provide for inter-district transfers of servants belonging to the panchayat service and the circumstances in which and the conditions subject to which such transfers may be made.(8) the promotion of servant in a cadre in the panchayat service to a cadre in the state service in accordance with rules made under clause (a) of sub-section (6) shall not affect-(a) any obligation or liability incurred or default committed by such servant during the period of his service in a cadre in the panchayat service while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his duties as such servant, or(b) any investigation, disciplinary action or remedy in respect of such obligation, liability or default, and any such investigation, disciplinary action or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced in accordance with the law applicable thereto during the said period of service by such authority as the state government may be general or special order specify in this behalf.on a scrutiny of the aforesaid provision it is vivid that the services of employees of panchayat are regulated by rules. that apart, it is also luminous that it also includes the services in a panchayat in a village. be it noted, the state government has framed a set of rules namely, gujarat panchayat services (conduct) rules, 1998. it is also noticeable there are various rules like mali (class iv) (panchayat service) recruitment rules, 1998, mazdoors (class iv) (panchayat service) recruitment rules, 1999, plumber (class iv) (panchayat service) recruitment rules, 1999, the post of cleaner (class iv) (panchayat service) recruitment rules, 1998 etc. we need not dwell upon the facet who would be the competent authority to remove an employee from service, for that is not the controversy involved in the instant case. the purpose of referring to various provisions and rules is only to highlight the fact that conditions of service are controlled and governed by rules and certain powers are conferred on the sarpanch. as the provisions would show he has to act in accordance with the provisions of the act and the resolutions passed by the village panchayat. as we may notice from section 55, the sarpanch has been conferred certain executive functions under sub-section 55(2) of the act but the said power does not enable him to enter into a compromise. the said power has been specifically postulated in section 101 of the act and it is significant to note that the said power has been conferred on the village panchayat.14. section 5 of the act, as we have stated earlier, clearly lays down that a village panchayat is a body corporate. in daman singh and ors. v. state of punjab and ors. manu/sc/0392/1985manu/sc/0392/1985 : air 1985 sc 973 while dealing with validity of various cooperative societies act, the court referred to section 30 of punjab cooperative societies act, 1961 which provided that the registration of cooperative societies shall make it a body corporate. while dealing the concept of corporation the larger bench stated:what is a corporation? in halsbury's laws of england, 4th edition., volume 9, paragraph 1201, it is said:a corporation may be defined as a body of persons (in the case of a corporation aggregate) or an office (in the case of a corporation sole) which is recognised by the law as having a personality which is distinct from the separate personalities of the members of the body or the personality of the individual holder for the time being of the office in question.a corporation aggregate has been defined in para 1204 as,[a] collection of individuals united into one body under a special denomination, having perpetual succession under an artificial form, and vested by the policy of the law with the capacity of acting in several respects as an individual, particularly of taking and granting property, of contracting obligations and of suing and being sued, of enjoying privileges and immunities in common and of exercising a variety of political rights, more or less extensive, according to the design of its institution, or the powers conferred upon it, either at the time of its creation or at any subsequent period of its existencethereafter the court referred to another constitution bench decision in board of trustees, ayurvedic and unani tibia college, delhi v. state of delhi manu/sc/0351/1961manu/sc/0351/1961 : 1962 suppl (1) scr 156 : air 1962 sc 458. in the said case the constitution bench had reproduced statements contained in halsbury's laws of england a part of which was referred to in daman singh (supra) and added:a corporation aggregate has therefore only one capacity, namely, its corporate capacity. a corporation aggregate may be a trading corporation or a non-trading corporation. the usual examples of a trading corporation are (1) charter companies, (2) companies incorporated by special acts of parliament, (3) companies registered under the companies act, etc. non-trading corporations are illustrated by (1) municipal corporations, (2) district boards, (3) benevolent institutions, (4) universities etc. an essential element in the legal conception of a corporation is that its identity is continuous, that is, that the original member or members and his or their successors are one. in law the individual corporators, or members, of which it is composed are something wholly different from the corporation itself; for a corporation is a legal persona just as much as an individual. thus, it has been held that a name is essential to a corporation; that a corporation aggregate can, as a general rule, only act or express its will by deed under its common seal; that at the present day in england a corporation is created by one or other of two methods, namely, by royal charter of incorporation from the crown or by the authority of parliament that is to say, by or by virtue of statute. there is authority of long standing for saying that the essence of a corporation consists in (1) lawful authority of incorporation, (2) the persons to be incorporated, (3) a name by which the persons are incorporated, (4) a place, and (5) words sufficient in law to show incorporation. no particular words are necessary for the creation of a corporation; any expression showing an intention to incorporate will be sufficient.the purpose of referring to the same is that the village panchayat by a specific provision of the act is regarded as a body corporate. a body corporate as has been held can sue or be sued in its name. section 101, which we have already reproduced, confers power on the village panchayat to enter into a compromise. as the factual matrix has been uncurtained, the village panchayat represented itself through the sarpanch. nothing has been brought on record that the panchayat had conferred any authority on the sarpanch to enter into any kind of settlement with the workman, the first respondent herein. in the absence of any authority and in the absence of any statutory permissibility it is absolutely inconceivable in law that a sarpanch can enter into settlement with a workman.15. another material aspect which is required to be taken note of is that the learned single judge has referred to section 2(g) of industrial disputes act, 1947. it defines the term "employer". we are disposed to think that by no stretch of imagination it can be held that the sarpanch is the employer of the workman. he belongs to the village panchayat services if he had properly been appointed. it is the village panchayat which is the employer. the laconic analysis on the part of the learned single judge in this regard does not commend acceptance and we are unable to agree with the same.16. in the obtaining factual score, we are impelled to observe that a sarpanch is required to look after the interest of the gram panchayat. the legislature has given certain executive powers under section 55 of the act. we repeat at the cost of repetition that it has its limitations. he should not rush into an area where angels fear to tread. part ix of the constitution has been inserted by the constitution 73rd (amendment) act, 1992. article 243 is the dictionary clause. article 243(d) defines "panchayat" to mean an institution (by whatever name called) of self-government constituted under article 243b, for the rural areas. 243b deals with the constitution of panchayats. 243c provides for composition of panchayats. 243g deals with powers, authority and responsibilities of panchayats. the said article is as follows:243g. powers, authority and responsibilities of panchayats - subject to the provisions of this constitution, the legislature of a state may, by law, endow the panchayats with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to-(a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;(b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and social justice as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters listed in the eleventh schedule.17. the purpose of our referring to the same is that the parliament by the constitutional amendment required the state legislature to bring their state laws in conformity with part ix of the constitution, power has been conferred on the panchayats so that they are able to function as an institution of self-government. the state legislature has also been empowered to make provisions by which powers are given to the gram panchayats. once responsibility is given they are to be carried out with sanguine responsibility. a sarpanch, as we perceive in this case, by entering into a settlement has not only acted contrary to the provisions of the act and but also the spirit of the responsibility cast on the local self-government.18. in this context, we cannot be oblivious of a very significant facet. the labour court as we find in a single line order has accepted the settlement and has not made any endeavour to even find out whether the sarpanch was authorised with any kind of resolution to enter into compromise/settlement by the village panchayat. he should have borne in mind that it is not the sarpanch who was the employer; that much of scrutiny was required on the part of the labour court. it will not be a hyperbole if it is said that it is the bounden duty on the part of the presiding officer of the labour court to do so and we say so without any hesitation, for court has a sacred duty to scrutinize whether a valid compromise has been entered into or not. he has to be satisfied that the compromise is lawful.19. in view of the aforesaid analysis, we allow the appeals set aside the order passed by the learned single judge and that of the labour court and remit the matter to the labour court for fresh adjudication. we may hasten to clarify that we have not expressed any opinion on the merits of the case. as indicated earlier we have not dwelt upon as regards the maintainability of the intra court appeal and we have not expressed any opinion on that score. be it clarified, the judgment of the division bench barring maintainability has not dealt with the issue of merits. regard being had to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case there shall be no order as to costs.
kurian joseph, j.1. this is a transfer petition filed under section 25 of code of civil procedure for transfer of hma no. 268/2015 titled sanjeev kumar juneja v. akta juneja from the court of djfc, gurgaon, haryana to the family court, saket, delhi.2. both parties are present today.3. the respondent-husband fairly submits that he is not actually against the transfer but he is aggrieved by the allegations levelled against him in the petition which are wholly baseless. he also submits that the petitioner is not cooperating with the visitation rights given to the respondent for the child 'shubhan'.4. the petitioner submits that she has no objection if the respondent-father takes the child as per the order of the court on every sunday for three hours. she is only worried that the child is not getting proper attention.5. the respondent-father assures that he will take proper care of the child. therefore, while allowing this transfer petition, it is made clear that petitioner shall cooperate with the order for taking the minor child every sunday for three hours. the respondent, in turn, shall ensure that he would take the child from the residence of the petitioner and after three hours he will drop back the child at the residence of the petitioner. he also assures that he will always be in the company of the child.6. the transfer petition is disposed of with the above observations.
anil r. dave, j.1. leave granted.2. upon hearing the learned counsel, we have learnt that the appellant has already filed an appeal before the debts recovery tribunal at ahmedabad (drt), being securitisation appeal no. 38 of 2001, which is pending. similarly, the respondent-bank has also filed an appeal before the gujarat state cooperative tribunal against order dated 4th november, 2003, passed by the learned board of nominees at ahmedabad in lavad case no. 39 of 2000.3. as both appeals are pending, we would not like to entertain this appeal on merits. we direct the drt and the gujarat state cooperative tribunal to decide the appeals pending before them within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.4. during the pendency of afore-stated appeals before the appellate authorities, no coercive steps shall be taken for recovery of the amount under the provisions of the securitization and reconstruction of financial assets and enforcement of security interest act, 2002 (sarfaesi act).5. the question of law with regard to applicability of the sarfaesi act, 2002 and the multi-state cooperative societies act, 2002, is kept open.6. the registry shall give intimation of this order to the afore-stated authorities.7. in view of the above order, the appeal stands disposed of with no order as to costs.
anil r. dave, j.1. leave granted.2. looking at the peculiar facts of the case, in the interests of justice, we direct that upon payment of rs. 25,000/- by way of costs to the sole respondent within two months from today, the impugned judgment shall be set aside and tax appeal no. 3 of 2013 shall be restored to its original number and shall be heard on merits by the high court.3. with the above directions, the civil appeal is allowed with the abovesaid costs.4. it is clarified that if the amount is not deposited within the stipulated time, this order shall not operate and the impugned judgment shall remain in force.5. leave granted.6. the civil appeal is allowed in terms of the signed non-reportable judgment.
ranjan gogoi, j.1. religion incorporates the particular belief(s) that a group of people subscribe to. hinduism, as a religion, incorporates all forms of belief without mandating the selection or elimination of any one single belief. it is a religion that has no single founder; no single scripture and no single set of teachings. it has been described as sanatan dharma, namely, eternal faith, as it is the collective wisdom and inspiration of the centuries that hinduism seeks to preach and propagate. it is keeping in mind the above precepts that we will proceed further.2. before highlighting the issues that confronts the court in the present case the relevant constitutional provisions in part iii of the constitution may be taken note of. article 13, in clear and unequivocal terms, lays down that all laws including pre-constitution laws which are inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights guaranteed by part iii are void. sub-article (3) brings within the fold of laws, all rules, regulations, notification, custom and usage having the force of law. while the several provisions of part iii would hardly need to be re-emphasized, specific notice must be had of, in the context of the present case, the provisions contained in articles 25 and 26 of the constitution. while article 25 makes the freedom of conscience and the right to profess, practice and propagate the religion to which a person may subscribe, a fundamental right, the exercise of such right has been made subject to public order, morality and health and also to the other provisions of part iii. article 25(2)(b) makes it clear that main part of the provisions contained in article 25 will not come in the way of the operation of any existing law or prevent the state from making any law which provides for social welfare and reform or for throwing open of hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of hindus. similarly, article 26 while conferring the right on every religious denomination to manage its own affairs makes it clear that the right to manage the affairs of any religious denomination is restricted to matters of religion only.3. the provisions of part iii, as noted above, therefore makes it amply clear that while the right to freedom of religion and to manage the religious affairs of any denomination is undoubtedly a fundamental right, the same is subject to public order, morality and health and further that the inclusion of such rights in part iii of the constitution will not prevent the state from acting in an appropriate manner, in the larger public interest, as mandated by the main part of both articles 25 and 26. besides, the freedom of religion being subject to the other provisions of part iii, undoubtedly, articles 25 and 26 of the constitution has to be harmoniously construed with the other provisions contained in part iii.4. the necessary facts may now be noticed. in order to amend and consolidate the law relating to administration and governance of hindu religious and charitable institutions in the state of tamil nadu, the state legislature has enacted the tamil nadu hindu religious and charitable endowments act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as 'the tamil nadu act'). a passing reference may be made, at this stage, to section 55 of the tamil nadu act which provided that in case where the office holders or servants of a religious institution are required to be filled up on the principle of hereditary succession the person next in line of succession is entitled to succeed. there were some exceptions to the above rule i.e. where the person next in line is a minor or suffers from some incapacity. the aforesaid provision (section 55) was amended alongwith other related provisions by the amendment act of 1970 which came into force on january 8, 1971. by the aforesaid amendment the principle of next in line of succession was abolished. the amendment came to be challenged before this court which challenge was considered by a constitution bench of the court. in its judgment in seshammal and ors. etc. etc. v. state of tamil nadu manu/sc/0631/1972manu/sc/0631/1972 : (1972) 2 scc 11 the constitution bench, while upholding the validity of the amendment, dealt with a further question, namely, though the principle of next in line was validly abolished, whether the appointment of office bearers or servants of the temples are required to be made from a particular denomination/group/sect as mandated by the agamas i.e. treatises pertaining to matters like construction of temples; installation of idols and conduct of worship of the deity. the constitution bench after an elaborate consideration of the matter, details of which will be noticed subsequently, seems to have answered the aforesaid question in the affirmative.5. no controversy surfaced after the constitution bench judgment in seshammal (supra) until a g.o. no. 118 dated 23.05.2006 was issued by the government of tamil nadu, department of tamil development, cultural and endowments to the effect that, "any person who is a hindu and possessing the requisite qualification and training can be appointed as a archaka in hindu temples". an ordinance (no. 5/2006) dated 14.07.2006 followed the aforesaid g.o. seeking to further amend sub-section (2) of section 55 of the tamil nadu act. the said provision of the act i.e. section 55(2), by virtue of the 1971 amendment referred to above and the 2006 ordinance, read as follows.(2) no person shall be entitled to appointment to any vacancy referred to in sub-section (1) merely on the ground that he is next in the line of succession to the last holder of office.[change brought about by amendment of section 55(2)]or on the ground of any custom or usage.[change brought about by ordinance 5/2006)6. the explanatory statement to the ordinance in para 4 indicated the purpose behind further amendment of section 55(2) in the following terms.archakas of the temples are to be appointed without any discrimination of caste and creed. custom or usage cannot be a hindrance to this. it is considered that the position is clarified in the act itself and accordingly, it has been decided to amend section 55 of the said act suitably.7. the ordinance was replaced by the tamil nadu act no. 15 of 2006 which received the assent of the governor on 29.08.2006. the act, however, did not contain the amendment to section 55 as was made by the ordinance. in other words, the said amendment brought by the ordinance was dropped from the amending act 15 of 2006.8. the present writ petitions under article 32 of the constitution have been instituted by an association of archakas and individual archakas of sri meenakshi amman temple of madurai. the writ petitions were filed challenging the g.o. no. 118 dated 23.05.2006 and ordinance no. 5/2006 (at that point of time the amending act of 2006 had not come into effect). as the amendment of section 55(2) made by the ordinance had not been continued by the amending act 15 of 2006 the said part of the challenge (as against the ordinance) made in the writ petitions became redundant leaving the legality and validity of the g.o. 23.05.2006 as the sole issue for consideration in the present writ petitions.9. preliminary objections have been raised to the maintainability of the writ petitions by shri p.p. rao and shri colin gonsalves, learned senior counsels appearing for respondents. it has been urged that the present writ petitions have not been filed as public interest litigations and in the absence of any specific orders in implementation of the impugned g.o. dated 23.05.2006 the writ petitions are premature. it is further contended that even if the writ petitions are to be considered as pils the same raise questions with regard to appointment in public office i.e. archakas in public temples and therefore the writ petitions will also not be maintainable as public interest litigations. it is further urged that as and when the g.o. is given effect to by actual appointment of an archaka or archakas, as may be, it will be open for the petitioners to raise the issue and establish that there is a usage or custom or customary practice governing the temple in question which require the appointment of the archaka to be made from a particular denomination.10. it is difficult for us to accept the contentions advanced on behalf of the respondents with regard to the maintainability of writ petitions on two counts. firstly, it is difficult to appreciate as to why the petitioners should be non-suited at the threshold merely because the g.o. dated 23.05.2006 has not been given effect to by actual orders of the state government. the institution of a writ proceeding need not await actual prejudice and adverse effect and consequence. an apprehension of such harm, if the same is well founded, can furnish a cause of action for moving the court. the argument that the present writ petition is founded on a cause relating to appointment in a public office and hence not entertainable as a public interest litigation would be too simplistic a solution to adopt to answer the issues that have been highlighted which concerns the religious faith and practice of a large number of citizens of the country and raises claims of century old traditions and usage having the force of law. the above is the second ground, namely, the gravity of the issues that arise, that impel us to make an attempt to answer the issues raised and arising in the writ petitions for determination on the merits thereof.11. shri k. parasaran, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners has submitted that the issues arising in the case stand squarely covered by the pronouncement of the constitution bench in seshammal (supra). in fact, according to the learned senior counsel, the issues in the present case are res judicata; the same having been decided inter-partes in seshammal (supra); the archakas of the agamas temples and the respondent-state both being parties to the said decision. specifically, shri parasaran, has urged that in seshammal (supra) the constitution bench has unambiguously held that the appointment of an archaka has to be as per the agamas governing the particular temple and any deviation from the said age old custom and usage would be an infringement of the freedom of religion and the rights of the religious denomination to manage its own affairs, as guaranteed, by article 25 and 26 of the constitution. the impugned g.o., by its prescription, as noted, therefore, seeks to override the declaration of law made by the constitution bench in seshammal (supra).12. shri parasaran has further urged that curtailment of the freedoms guaranteed by articles 25 and 26 of the constitution can only be made by the legislature and even a legislative exercise in this regard is circumscribed by the limitations contained in both articles 25 and 26. in the present case the amendment of section 55 of the tamil nadu act as made by ordinance no. 6 of 2005 has not been continued by the amendment act no. 15 of 2006 (as already noted). the impugned g.o. has, therefore, to necessarily lose its efficacy. reliance herein is placed on the following passage from the report in sanjeev coke manufacturing v. bharat coking coal limited and anr. manu/sc/0040/1982manu/sc/0040/1982 : (1983) 1 scc 147.25...........the deponents of the affidavits filed into court may speak for the parties on whose behalf they swear to the statements. they do not speak for the parliament. no one may speak for the parliament and parliament is never before the court. after parliament has said what it intends to say, only the court may say what the parliament meant to say. none else. once a statute leaves parliament house, the court is the only authentic voice which may echo (interpret) the parliament........13. it was further contended that the g.o. wrongly relies on the decision in the case of n. adhithyan v. travancore devasom board and ors. manu/sc/0862/2002manu/sc/0862/2002 : (2002) 8 scc 106 to justify its promulgation. the reliance placed on adhithyan (supra), in the face of the law laid down in seshammal (supra), is wholly misplaced. shri parasaran has further argued that the impugned go has to be read on its own terms and the validity thereof cannot be saved by what appears to be a "concession" made by the state in para 51 of the counter affidavit to the effect that the state would respect the distinction between saiva and vaishanava temples and the archakas in each of such temples shall be appointed from either the saivas or vaishanavas, as may be, taking into account the indoctrination of the concerned archakas in the agamas. according to shri parasaran, neither all saivas nor all vaishnavas are ipso facto denominational. only a saiva who satisfies the eligibility under the sivagama and a vaishnava satisfying the eligibility under the pancharatna or vaikhanasa can be referred to as denominations. a person who is a member of such denomination alone can be appointed as a archaka of a saiva or a vaishnava temple, as the case may be.14. on the other hand, shri p.p. rao and shri colin gonsalves, learned senior counsels appearing for the respondents have contended that the decision of the constitution bench in seshammal (supra) upholding the constitution validity of the amendment act of 1970 had opened the avenue to all qualified hindus irrespective of caste, denominations, etc to be appointed as archakas. it is contended that once the hereditary principle was held to be flexible, the exclusive right of a particular group to appointment necessarily stood negated and it is qualification coupled with merit and eligibility that has to be the crucial test for appointment, consistent with articles 14 and 16 of the constitution. learned counsels have specifically referred to the government order no. 1 of 2007 and in this regard the recommendation of the high powered committee appointed for making recommendations for effective implementation of the impugned go dated 23.5.2006. it is contended, by referring to the report of the high powered committee, that the same demonstrates the lack of familiarity of even temple priests with the agamas and their lack of knowledge of such agamas and the practices of the temples as may be prescribed by the agamas. it is submitted that not only the contents of the agamas have become uncertain, even assuming otherwise, the same cannot be an authority to confer legitimacy to a practice which is inconsistent with and contrary to the provisions of the constitution, specially those contained in part iii thereof. it is further submitted that the impugned go is consistent with and in fact effectuates the fundamental right of equality and equal opportunity and no contrary practice overriding the said provisions of the constitution would be legally acceptable. learned counsels have further submitted that there is no conflict between the judgments in seshammal (supra) and n. adithayan (supra) and it is possible to read the law declared in both the cases in a manner consistent with the constitutional requirements and principles.15. an additional issue has been struck by shri gonsalves, learned senior counsel, that the impugned go needs to be upheld on the touchstone of the principle enshrined by article 17 of the constitution. the exclusive right of a particular group to enter the sanctum sanctorum of a temple and perform the rituals on the ground that performance of such rituals by any other person would defile the image is a thought and action which is prohibited by article 17 of the constitution. violation and consequently commission of offences under the protection of civil rights act, 1955 has also been urged.16. the issues arising and the arguments made centre around the true meaning, purport and effect of the constitution bench judgment in seshammal (supra) and in the above context the effect of the decision of the numerically smaller bench in n. adithayan (supra). we will therefore proceed to understand the above position at the outset.17. the contours of the challenge in seshammal (supra) has already been noticed. to repeat, it is the validity of the amendment act of 1970 which sought to amend, inter alia, section 55 of the tamil nadu act that was questioned in seshammal (supra). the statement of objects and reasons for the amendment act of 1970 is stated as follows:in the year 1969 the committee on untouchability, economic and educational development of the scheduled castes has suggested in its report that the hereditary priesthood in the hindu society should be abolished, that the system can be replaced by an ecclesiastical organisation of men possessing the requisite educational qualifications who may be trained in recognised institutions in priesthood and that the line should be open to all candidates irrespective of caste, creed or race. in tamil nadu archakas, gurukkals and poojaries are all ulthurai servants in hindu temples. the duties of 'ulthurai servants' relate mainly to the performance of poojas rituals and other services to the deity, the recitation of mantras, vedas, prabandas, thevarams and similar invocations and the performance of duties connected with such performance and recitations. sections 55 and 56 of the tamil nadu hindu religious and charitable endowments act, 1959 (tamil nadu act 22 of 1959), provide for appointment of office-holders and servants in the religious institutions by the trustees by applying the rule of hereditary succession also. as a step towards social reform hindu temples have already been thrown open to all hindus irrespective of caste....18. the arguments in support of the challenge were threefold namely,(a) the freedom of hereditary succession to the office of archaka is abolished although succession to it is an essential and integral part of the faith of the saivite and vaishnavite worshippers.(b) it is left to the government in power to prescribe or not to prescribe such qualifications as they may choose to adopt for applicants to this religious office while the act itself gives no indication whatever of the principles on which the qualifications should be based. the statement of objects and reasons which is adopted in the counter-affidavit on behalf of the state makes it clear that not only the scope but the object of the amendment act is to override the exclusive right of the denomination to manage their own affairs in the matter of religion by appointing archakas belonging to a specific denomination for the purpose of worship.(c) the amendment act gives the right of appointment for the first time to the trustee who is under the control of the government under the provisions of the principal act and this is the very negation of freedom of religion and the principle of non-interference by the state as regards the practice of religion and the right of a denomination to manage its own affairs in the matter of religion.19. in the course of a very lengthy discourse and after considering the works of learned scholars in the field; the law laid down by this court in respect of articles 25 and 26 till date and particularly the efficacy of the agamas the constitution bench came to the following conclusion.any state action which permits the defilement or pollution of the image by the touch of an archaka not authorised by the agamas would violently interfere with the religious faith and practices of the hindu worshipper in a vital respect, and would, therefore, be prima facie invalid under article 25(1) of the constitution.20. thereafter, the constitution bench by referring to several earlier pronouncements of this court specifically mentioned in para 13 of the report identified the main principles underlying the provisions of article 25 and 26 of the constitution in the following manner.the first is that the protection of these articles is not limited to matters of doctrine or belief they extend also to acts done in pursuance of religion and therefore contain a guarantee for rituals and observances, ceremonies and modes of worship which are integral parts of religion. the second is that what constitutes an essential part of a religious or religious practice has to be decided by the courts with reference to the doctrine of a particular religion and include practices which are regarded by the community as a part of its religion.21. applying the aforesaid principles to the facts before it the constitution bench identified the main thrust of the arguments made in support of the challenge to the amendment to be with regard to the vesting of powers and authority in the temple trustee to appoint any person as an archaka so long as he was holding a fitness certificate from one of the institutions referred to in rule 12 of the madras hindu religious institutions (officers and servants) service rules, 1964. the said rule 12 required that an archaka should be proficient in mantras, vedas, prabandams etc., namely, that such a person is fit and qualified for performing puja and having knowledge of the rituals and other services. the constitution bench was told that the above position admits a situation where the requirement of rule 12 can very well be dispensed with (by a subsequent amendment of the rules) thereby resulting in conferment of virtually unguided and unbridled powers to the trustee to appoint any person as a archaka notwithstanding the fact that worship of the deity by a person other than one belonging to a particular denomination may have the effect of defiling the deity. as the temple trustee is to function under the control of the state under section 27 of the tamil nadu act the question highlighted before the constitution bench was whether by virtue of the amendment the state had gained a right to step into and control the sanctum sanctorum of a temple through the agency of the trustee and the archaka thereby transgressing the rights granted to a religious denomination by articles 25 and 26 of the constitution.22. the constitution bench noticed that to counter the above situation the advocate general of the state of tamil nadu had contended that the power given to the trustee by virtue of the amendment to section 55 was not a unqualified power but was subject to the provisions of section 28 of the act which is in the following terms.section 28.-subject to the provisions of the tamil nadu temple entry authorisation act, 1947, the trustee of every religious institution is bound to administer its affairs and to apply its funds and properties in accordance with the terms of the trust, the usage of the institution and all lawful directions which a competent authority may issue in respect thereof and as carefully as a man of ordinary prudence would deal with such affairs, funds and properties if they were his own.in this regard the advocate general had virtually admitted that if the usage or practice of the institution required the archaka of a temple to be of a particular denomination the said usage would be binding on the trustee and he would be bound to make appointment under section 55 in accordance with such usage. the usage, practice or custom requiring an archaka to be of a particular denomination, according to the advocate general, was founded on religious beliefs and practices whereas the next in line principle, if is to be regarded as a usage, was a merely secular usage on which a legislation would be competent under article 25(2)(a) of the constitution. it was, alternatively, contended that if the hereditary principle is to be understood as a religious practice, alteration thereof can also be made by a legislation under article 25(2)(b), such legislation being for the purpose of social welfare and reform.23. the constitution bench in seshammal (supra) answered the question by holding that the hereditary principle which was of long usage was a secular principle and therefore a legislation to alter the said usage, i.e. the amendment act of 1970, was competent under article 25(2)(a). however, the constitution bench was quick to add that it is to the limited extent of the above exception alone, namely, the liberty to make the appointment from persons beyond next in line to the last holder that the trustee is released from the obligation imposed on him by section 28 of the tamil nadu act which otherwise requires the trustee to administer the affairs of the temple in accordance with the usage governing the temple. para 22 of the constitution bench judgment wherein the aforesaid view finds mention may be noticed verbatim.22. in view of sub-section (2) of section 55, as it now stands amended, the choice of the trustee in the matter of appointment of an archaka is no longer limited by the operation of the rule of next-in-line of succession in temples where the usage was to appoint the archaka on the hereditary principle. the trustee is not bound to make the appointment on the sole ground that the candidate, is the next-in-line of succession to the last holder of office. to that extent, and to that extent alone, the trustee is released from the obligation imposed on him by section 28 of the principal act to administer the affairs in accordance with that part of the usage of a temple which enjoined hereditary appointments. the legislation in this respect, as we have shown, does not interfere with any religious practice or matter of religion and, therefore, is not invalid.24. a reading of the judgment of the constitution bench in seshammal (supra) shows that the bench considered the expanse of the agamas both in saivite and vaishnavite temples to hold that the said treatises restricted the appointment of archakas to a particular religious denomination(s) and further that worship of the deity by persons who do not belong to the particular denomination(s) may have the effect of even defiling the idol requiring purification ceremonies to be performed. the constitution bench further held that while the appointment of archakas on the principle of next in line is a secular act the particular denomination from which archakas are required to be appointed as per the agamas embody a long standing belief that has come to be firmly embedded in the practices immediately surrounding the worship of the image and therefore such beliefs/practice constitute an essential part of the religious practice which under section 28 of the act (extracted above) the trustee is bound to follow. the above, which the petitioners contend to be the true ratio of the law laid down by the constitution bench in seshammal (supra), has been questioned by the respondents who argue that seshammal (supra) is but the expression of an agreement of the constitution bench to what was a concession made before it by the advocate general of the state. according to the respondent in seshammal (supra) the constitution bench had no occasion to deal with the issue arising herein, the challenge before it being confined to the validity of the amendment act of 1970.25. the answers to the above will be dealt with a little later and for the present what has to engage the attention of the court is the true ratio of the law laid down by the numerically smaller bench in adithayan (supra).26. the facts confronting the court in adithayan (supra) may now be noticed. the challenge therein was by a namboodri brahmin to the appointment of a non-namboodri brahmin who was otherwise well qualified to be appointed as a priest in the temple in question. the challenge was sought to be based on the ground that it has been a long standing practice and usage in the temple that its priests are appointed exclusively from namboodri brahmins and any departure therefrom is in violation of the rights of namboodri brahmins under article 25 and 26 of the constitution. upon a consideration of the various earlier decisions of this court specifically referred to in adithayan (supra), details of which need not again be noticed herein (such details are being separately noticed later, though in a different context) including the decision in seshammal (supra) it was held that rights claimed solely on the basis of caste cannot enjoy the protection of article 25 and 26 and no earlier decision of this court including seshammal (supra) would support the contention that even duly qualified persons can be barred from performing poojas on the sole ground that such a person is not a brahmin by birth or pedigree. after expounding the law in the above manner, it was held in adithayan (supra) that even proof of any such practice since the pre-constitutional days (which in any case was not forthcoming) cannot sustain such a claim as the same would be in derogation of constitutional values and opposed to public policy or social decency. we do not see how the above view of this court in any way strikes a discordant note with the views expressed in any earlier decision including seshammal (supra). the issues in seshammal (supra) were entirely different and the discussions therein (para 12) proceeds on the basis that entry to the sanctum sanctorum for a particular denomination is without any reference to caste or social status. the reference to the opinion of sri r. parthasarathy bhattacharya who has been referred to in the above para 12 of the report as an undisputed scholar on the subject was cited to show that apart from the followers of the 4 (four) traditions, so far as vaishnava temples are concerned ".....none others, however high placed in society as pontiffs or acharyas, or even other brahmins could touch the idols, do pooja or enter the garba girha........" exclusion solely on the basis of caste was not an issue in seshammal (supra) so as to understand the decision in adithayan (supra) to be, in any way, a departure from what has been held in seshammal (supra).27. before we go on to deliberate on the validity of the impugned g.o. dated 23.05.2006 it will be useful to try to understand what is hinduism? a broad answer is to be found in the preface to this report but, perhaps, we should delve a little deeper into the issue. the subject has received an in depth consideration of the country's philosopher president dr. s. radhakrishnan in the celebrated work " the hindu way of life". the said work has been exhaustively considered in sastri yagnapurushadji and ors. v. muldas bhudradas vaishya and anr. manu/sc/0040/1966manu/sc/0040/1966 : 1966(3) scr 242 in the context of the question as to whether swaminarayan sect is a religion distinguishable and separate from the hindu religion and consequently the temples belonging to the said sect fell outside the scope of section 3 of the bombay hindu places of public worship (entry authorisation) act, 1956. the aforesaid section 3 of the act inter alia provided that every temple to which the act applied shall be open to the excluded classes for worship in the same manner and to the same extent as other hindus in general. while the eventual decision of the court which answered the question raised is in the negative, namely, that the sect in question was not a distinguishable and different religion, it is the very learned discourse that is to be found in the report with regard to the true tenets of hinduism that would be of interest so far the present case is concerned. the following passages from the report are truly worthy of reproduction both for the purpose of recapitulation and illumination.................. .............. ............ ............when we think of the hindu religion, we find it difficult, if not impossible, to define hindu religion or even adequately describe it. unlike other religions in the world, the hindu religion does not claim any one prophet; it does not worship any one god; it does not subscribe to any one dogma; it does not believe in any one philosophic concept; it does not follow any one set of religious rites or performances; in fact, it does not appear to satisfy the narrow traditional features of any religion or creed. it may broadly be described as a way of life and nothing more.................. .............. ............ ............the hindu thinkers reckoned with the striking fact that the men and women dwelling in india belonged to different communities, worshipped different gods, and practiced different rites (kurma purana). (ibid p.12.)................. .............. ............ ............"it presents for our investigation a complex congeries of creeds and doctrines which in its gradual accumulation may be compared to the gathering together of the mighty volume of the ganges, swollen by a continual influx of tributary rivers and rivulets, spreading itself over an ever-increasing area of country and finally resolving itself into an intricate delta of tortuous steams and jungly marshes........ the hindu religion is a reflection of the composite character of the hindus, who are not one people but many. it is based on the idea of universal receptivity. it has ever aimed at accommodating itself to circumstances, and has carried on the process of adaptation through more than three thousand years. it has first borne with and then, so to speak, swallowed, digested, and assimilated something from all creeds." ("religious thought & life in india" by monier williams, p. 57.)the history of indian thought emphatically brings out the fact that the development of hindu religion has always been inspired by an endless quest of the mind for truth based on the consciousness that truth has many facets. truth is one, but wise men describe if differently. the indian mind has, consistently through the ages, been exercised over the problem of the nature of godhead the problem that faces the spirit at the end of life, and the interrelation between the individual and the universal soul. "if we can abstract from the variety of opinion", says dr. radhakrishnan, "and observe the general spirit of indian thought, we shall find that it has a disposition to interpret life and nature in the way of monistic idealism, though this tendency is so plastic, living and manifold that it takes many forms and expresses itself in even mutually hostile teachings". (ibid, p.32.)though philosophic concepts and principles evolved by different hindu thinkers and philosophers varied in many ways and even appeared to conflict with each other in some particulars, they all had reverence for the past and accepted the vedas as the sole foundation of the hindu philosophy. naturally enough, it was realised by hindu religion from the very beginning of its career that truth was many-sided and different views contained different aspects of truth which no one could fully express.do the hindus worship at their temples the same set or number of gods ? that is another question which can be asked in this connection; and the answer to this question again has to be in the negative. indeed, there are certain sections of the hindu community which do not believe in the worship of idols; and as regards those sections of the hindu community which believe in the worship of idols their idols differ from community to community and it cannot be said that one definite idol or a definite number of idols are worshipped by all the hindu in general. in the hindu pantheon the first goods that were worshipped in vedic times were mainly indra, varuna, vayu and agni. later, brahma, vishnu and mahesh came to be worshipped. in course of time, rama and krishna secured a place of pride in the hindu pantheon, and gradually as different philosophic concepts held sway in different sects and in different sections of the hindu community, a large number of gods were added, with the result that today, the hindu pantheon presents the spectacle of a very large number of gods who are worshipped by different sections of the hindus.the development of hindu religion and philosophy shows that from time to time saints and religious reformers attempted to remove from the hindu thought and practices elements of corruption and superstition and that led to the formation of different sects. buddha stated buddhism; mahavir founded jainism; basava became the founder of lingayat religion, dnyaneshwar and tukaram initiated the varakari cult; guru nanak inspired sikhism; dayananda founded arya samaj, and chaitanya began bhakti cult; and as a result of the teachings of ramakrishna and vivekananda, hindu religion flowered into its most attractive, progressive and dynamic form. if we study the teachings of these saints and religious reformers, we would notice an amount of divergence in their respective views; but underneath that divergence, there is a kind of subtle indescribable unity which keeps them within the sweep of the broad and progressive hindu religion.tilak faced this complex and difficult problem of defining or at least describing adequately hindu religion and he evolved a working formula which may be regarded as fairly adequate and satisfactory. said tilak: "acceptance of the vedas with reverence; recognition of the fact that the means or ways to salvation are diverse and realisation of the truth that the number of gods to be worshipped is large, that indeed is the distinguishing feature of hindu religion. this definition brings out succinctly the broad distinctive features of hindu religion. it is somewhat remarkable that this broad sweep of hindu religion has been eloquently described by toynbee. says toynbee: "when we pass from the plane of social practice to the plane of intellectual outlook, hinduism too comes out well by comparison with the religions an ideologies of the south-west asian group. in contrast to these hinduism has the same outlook as the pre-christian and pre-muslim religions and philosophies of the western half of the old world. like them, hinduism takes it for granted that there is more than one valid approach to truth and to salvation and that these different approaches are not only compatible with each other, but are complementary.28. the fact that reference to hindus in the constitution includes persons professing the sikh, jain and buddhist religions and the statutory enactments like hindu marriage act, hindu succession act etc. also embraces sikhs, jains and buddhists within the ambit of the said enactments is another significant fact that was highlighted and needs to be specially taken note of.29. what is sought to be emphasized is that all the above would show the wide expanse of beliefs, thoughts and forms of worship that hinduism encompasses without any divergence or friction within itself or amongst its adherents. it is in the backdrop of the above response to the question posed earlier "what is hinduism"? that we have to proceed further in the matter.30. image worship is a predominant feature of hindu religion. the origins of image worship is interesting and a learned discourse on the subject is available in a century old judgment of the madras high court in gopala mooppanar and ors. v. subramania iyer and ors. air 1915 madras 363. in the said report the learned judge (sadasiva aiyar, j.) on the basis of accepted texts and a study thereof had found that in the "first stage" of existence of mankind god was worshiped as immanent in the heart of everything and worship consisted solely in service to ones fellow creatures. in the second age, the spirit of universal brotherhood has lost its initial efficacy and notions of inferiority and superiority amongst men surfaced leading to a situation where the inferior man was asked to worship the superior man who was considered as a manifestation of god. disputes arose about the relative superiority and inferiority which was resolved by the wise sages by introducing image worship to enable all men to worship god without squabbles about their relative superiorities. with passage of time there emerged rules regulating worship in temples which came to be laid down in the treatises known as agamas and the thantras. specifically in gopala moopanar (supra), it was noticed that the agamas prescribed rules as regards "what caused pollution to a temple and as regards the ceremonies for removing pollution when caused." in the said judgment it is further mentioned that, "there are, it is well known thanthries in malabar who are specialists in these matters of pollution. as the temple priests have got the special saivite initiation or dheeksha which entitles them to touch the inner most image, and as the touch of the persons who have got no such initiation, even though they be brahmins, was supposed to pollute the image, even brahmins other than the temple priest were in many temples not allowed to go into the garbhagraham. the agamas also contain other prescriptions including who is entitled to worship from which portion of the temple. in one of the agamas it is said (as freely translated) thus: "saivite brahmin priests are entitled to worship in the anthrala portion. brahmins learned in the vedas are entitled to worship in the arthamantapa, other brahmins in the front mantapa, kings and vaisyas in the dwaramantapa, initiated sudras in the bahir mantapa" and so on." the legal effect of the above prescriptions need not detain us and it is the portion underlined which is of particular importance as the discussions that follow would reveal.31. the ecclesiastical jurisprudence in india, sans any specific ecclesiastical jurisdiction, revolves around the exposition of the constitutional guarantees under articles 25 and 26 as made from time to time. the development of this branch of jurisprudence primarily arises out of claimed rights of religious groups and denominations to complete autonomy and the prerogative of exclusive determination of essential religious practices and principles on the bedrock of the constitutional guarantees under articles 25 and 26 of the constitution and the judicial understanding of the inter-play between article 25(2)(b) and 26(b) of the constitution in the context of such claims. in the commissioner, hindu religious endowments, madras v. sri lakshmindra thirtha swamiar of sri shirur mutt manu/sc/0136/1954manu/sc/0136/1954 : 1954 scr 1005 (shirur mutt) while dealing with the issue of autonomy of a religious denomination to determine what rights and ceremonies are essential according to the tenets of its religion it has been stated that-under article 26(b), therefore a religious denomination or organization enjoys complete autonomy in the matter of deciding as to what rites and ceremonies are essential according to the tenets of the religion they hold and no outside authority has any jurisdiction to interfere with their decision in such matters.-(page 1028)32. besides the above, recognition of the aforesaid principle is also to be found in the fact that in shirur mutt (supra), though the eventual conclusion of the court upholds the validity of the act (madras hindu religious and charitable endowments act, 1951) certain specific provisions i.e. section 21 which empowered the commissioner and his subordinates to enter the premises of any religious institution at any time for performance of duties enjoined under the act has been struck down indicating consistency with the principle extracted above. the relevant of the report (page 1030/31) will require a specific notice and therefore is extracted below.we agree, however, with the high court in the view taken by it about section 21. this section empowers the commissioner and his subordinate officers and also persons authorised by them to enter the premises of any religious institution or place of worship for the purpose of exercising any power conferred or any duty imposed by or under the act. it is well known that there could be no such thing as an unregulated and unrestricted right of entry in a public temple or other religious institution, for persons who are not connected with the spiritual functions thereof. it is a traditional custom universally observed not to allow access to any outsider to the particularly sacred parts of a temple as for example, the place where the deity is located. there are also fixed hours of worship and rest for the idol when no disturbance by any member of the public is allowed. section 21, it is to be noted, does not confine the right of entry to the outer portion of the premises; it does not even exclude the inner sanctuary "the holy of holies" as it is said, the sanctity of which is zealously preserved. it does not say that the entry may be made after due notice to the head of the institution and at such hours which would not interfere with the due observance of the rites and ceremonies in the institution. we think that as the section stands, it interferes with the fundamental rights of the mathadhipati and the denomination of which he is head guaranteed under articles 25 and 26 of the constitution. our attention has been drawn in this connection to section 91 of the act which, it is said, provides a sufficient safeguard against any abuse of power under section 21. we cannot agree with this contention. clause (a) of section 91 excepts from the saving clause all express provisions of the act within which the provision of section 21 would have to be included. clause (b) again does not say anything about custom or usage obtaining in an institution and it does not indicate by whom and in what manner the question of interference with the religious and spiritual functions of the math would be decided in case of any dispute arising regarding it. in our opinion, section 21 has been rightly held to be invalid.-(page 1030/31)33. the decision of this court in sri venkataramana devaru and ors. v. state of mysore and ors. manu/sc/0026/1957manu/sc/0026/1957 : air 1958 sc 255 may now be considered. in the said case this court was called upon to answer as to whether section 3 of the madras temple entry authorization act violated the guarantee under article 26(b) insofar as gaura saraswati brahmins are concerned by making provisions to the effect that shri venkataramana temple at moolky was to be open to all excluded classes of hindus. it was the contention of the aforesaid sect that the temple in question was founded for the exclusive use and benefit of gaura saraswati brahmins. this court in its report elaborately discussed the practice of idol/image worship; regulation thereof by the agamas and the efficacy and enforceability of such agamas. paras 17 and 18 of the report which deals with the above aspect may be usefully extracted below.17. the gods have distinct forms ascribed to them and their worship at home and in temples is ordained as certain means of attaining salvation. these injunctions have had such a powerful hold over the minds of the people that daily worship of the deity in temple came to be regarded as one of the obligatory duties of a hindu. it was during this period that temples were constructed all over the country dedicated to vishnu, rudra, devi, skanda, ganesha and so forth, and worship in the temple can be said to have become the practical religion of all sections of the hindus ever since. with the growth in importance of temples and of worship therein, more and more attention came to be devoted to the ceremonial law relating to the construction of temples, installation of idols therein and conduct of worship of the deity, and numerous are the treatises that came to be written for its exposition. these are known as agamas, and there are as many as 28 of them relating to the saiva temples, the most important of them being the kamikagama, the karanagama and the suprabedagama, while the vikhanasa and the pancharatra are the chief agamas of the vaishnavas. these agamas, contain elaborate rules as to how the temple is to be constructed, where the principal deity is to be consecrated, and where the other devatas are to be installed and where the several classes of worshippers are to stand and worship. the following passage from the judgment of sadasiva aiyar j. in gopala muppanar v. subramania aiyar: manu/tn/0114/1914manu/tn/0114/1914 : (1914) 27 mlj 253, gives a summary of the prescription contained in one of the agamas:in the nirvachanapaddhathi it is said that sivadwijas should worship in the garbargriham, brahmins from the ante chamber or sabah mantabam, kshatriyas, vysias and sudras from the mahamantabham, the dancer and the musician from the nrithamantabham east of the mahamantabham and that castes yet lower in scale should content themselves with the sight of the gopuram.the other agamas also contain similar rules.18. according to the agamas, an image becomes defiled if there is any departure or violation of any of the rules relating to worship, and purificatory ceremonies (known as samprokshana) have to be performed for restoring the sanctity of the shrine. vide judgment of sadasiva aiyar j. in gopala muppanar v. subramania aiyar (supra). in sankaralinga nadan v. raja rajeswara dorai, it was held by the privy council affirming the judgment of the madras high court that a trustee who agreed to admit into the temple persons who were not entitled to worship therein, according to the agamas and the custom of the temple was guilty of breach of trust. thus, under the ceremonial law pertaining to temples, who are entitled to enter into them for worship and where they are entitled to stand and worship and how the worship is to be conducted are all matters of religion. the conclusion is also implicit in article 25 which after declaring that all persons are entitled freely to profess, practice and propagate religion, enacts that this should not affect the operation of any law throwing open hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of hindus. we have dealt with this question at some length in view of the argument of the learned solicitor-general that exclusion of persons from temple has not been shown to be a matter of religion with reference to the tenets of hinduism. we must accordingly hold that if the rights of the appellants have to be determined solely with reference to article 26(b), then section 3, of act v. of 1947, should be held to be bad as infringing it.eventually, this court went on to hold that the provisions of article 26(b) are also subject to those contained in article 25(2)(b) and accordingly dismissed the plea set up by the gaura saraswati brahmins in the suit out of which the proceedings arose.34. the explicit reiteration of the court's power to decide on what constitutes an essential religious practice in sri venkataramana devaru (supra) again found manifestation in durgah committee, ajmer and anr. v. syed hussain ali and ors. manu/sc/0063/1961manu/sc/0063/1961 : air 1961 sc 1402. gajendragadkar, j. (as his lordship then was) was of the view,....... that in order that the practices in question should be treated as a part of religion they must be regarded by the said religion as its essential and integral part; otherwise even purely secular practices which are not an essential or an integral part of religion are apt to be clothed with a religious form and may make a claim for being treated as religious practices within the meaning of article 26. similarly, even practices though religious may have sprung from merely superstitious beliefs and may in that sense be extraneous and unessential accretions to religion itself. unless such practices are found to constitute an essential and integral part of a religion their claim for the protection under article 26 may have to be carefully scrutinised; in other words, the protection must be confined to such religious practices as are an essential and an integral part of it and no other.35. almost half a century later, we find a reiteration of the same view in the majority judgment rendered in commissioner of police and ors. v. acharya jagadishwarananda avadhuta and anr. manu/sc/0218/2004manu/sc/0218/2004 : (2004) 12 scc 770 though the minority view in the said case preferred to take a contrary opinion relying, inter alia, on shirur mutt (supra) and jesse cantwell v. state of connecticut 84 l ed 1213 : 310 us 296 (1939) and united states v. ballard 88 l ed 1148 : 322 us 78 (1943). para 57 of the minority opinion containing the discordant note would be worthy of reproduction.57. the exercise of the freedom to act and practise in pursuance of religious beliefs is as much important as the freedom of believing in a religion. in fact to persons believing in religious faith, there are some forms of practising the religion by outward actions which are as much part of religion as the faith itself. the freedom to act and practise can be subject to regulations. in our constitution, subject to public order, health and morality and to other provisions in part iii of the constitution. however, in every case the power of regulation must be so exercised with the consciousness that the subject of regulation is the fundamental right of religion, and as not to unduly infringe the protection given by the constitution. further, in the exercise of the power to regulate, the authorities cannot sit in judgment over the professed views of the adherents of the religion and to determine whether the practice is warranted by the religion or not. that is not their function. (see jesse cantwell v. state of connecticut, l ed at pp. 1213-1218, united states v. ballard, l ed at pp. 1153, 1154.)36. that the freedom of religion under articles 25 and 26 of the constitution is not only confined to beliefs but extends to religious practices also would hardly require reiteration. right of belief and practice is guaranteed by article 25 subject to public order, morality and health and other provisions of part-iii of the constitution. sub-article (2) is an exception and makes the right guaranteed by sub-article (1) subject to any existing law or to such law as may be enacted to, inter alia, provide for social welfare and reforms or throwing or proposing to throw open hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and sections of hindus. article 26(b) on the other hand guarantees to every religious denomination or section full freedom to manage its own affairs insofar as matters of religion are concerned, subject, once again, to public order, morality and health and as held by this court subject to such laws as may be made under article 25(2)(b). the rights guaranteed by articles 25 and 26, therefore, are circumscribed and are to be enjoyed within constitutionally permissible parameters. often occasions will arise when it may become necessary to determine whether a belief or a practice claimed and asserted is a fundamental part of the religious practice of a group or denomination making such a claim before embarking upon the required adjudication. a decision on such claims becomes the duty of the constitutional court. it is neither an easy nor an enviable task that the courts are called to perform. performance of such tasks is not enjoined in the court by virtue of any ecclesiastical jurisdiction conferred on it but in view of its role as the constitutional arbiter. any apprehension that the determination by the court of an essential religious practice itself negatives the freedoms guaranteed by articles 25 and 26 will have to be dispelled on the touchstone of constitutional necessity. without such a determination there can be no effective adjudication whether the claimed right it is in conformity with public order, morality and health and in accord with the undisputable and unquestionable notions of social welfare and reforms. a just balance can always be made by holding that the exercise of judicial power to determine essential religious practices, though always available being an inherent power to protect the guarantees under articles 25 and 26, the exercise thereof must always be restricted and restrained.37. article 16(5) which has virtually gone unnoticed till date and, therefore, may now be seen is in the following terms:16(5)-nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any law which provides that an incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious or denominational institution or any member of the governing body thereof shall be a person professing a particular religion or belonging to a particular denomination.38. a plain reading of the aforesaid provision i.e. article 16(5), fortified by the debates that had taken place in the constituent assembly, according to us, protects the appointment of archakas from a particular denomination, if so required to be made, by the agamas holding the field. the debates in the constituent assembly referred to discloses that the suggestion that the operation of article 16(5) should be restricted to appointment in offices connected with administration of a religious institution was negatived. the exception in article 16(5), therefore, would cover an office in a temple which also requires performance of religious functions. in fact, the above though not expressly stated could be one of the basis for the views expressed by the constitution bench in sheshammal (supra).39. the preceding discussion indicates the gravity of the issues arising and the perceptible magnitude of the impact thereof on hindu society. it would be, therefore, incorrect, if not self defeating, to take too pedantic an approach at resolution either by holding the principle of res judicata or locus to bar an adjudication on merits or to strike down the impugned g.o. as an executive fiat that does not have legislative approval, made explicit by the fact that though what has been brought by the g.o. dated 23.05.2006 was also sought to be incorporated in the statute by the ordinance, eventually, the amending bill presented before the legislature specifically omitted the aforesaid inclusion. the significance of the aforesaid fact, however, cannot be underestimated. what is sought to be emphasized is that the same, by itself, cannot be determinative of the invalidity of the g.o. which will have to be tested on certain other premises and foundation treating the same to be an instance of exercise of executive power in an area not covered by any specific law.40. the issue of untouchability raised on the anvil of article 17 of the constitution stands at the extreme opposite end of the pendulum. article 17 of the constitution strikes at caste based practices built on superstitions and beliefs that have no rationale or logic. the exposition of the agamas made a century back by the madras high court in gopala moopnar (supra) that exclusion from the sanctum sanctorum and duties of performance of poojas extends even to brahmins is significant. the prescription with regard to the exclusion of even brahmins in gopala moopnar (supra) has been echoed in the opinion of sri parthasarthy bhattacharya as noted by the constitution bench in seshammal (supra). such exclusion is not on the basis of caste, birth or pedigree. the provisions of article 17 and the protection of civil rights act, 1955, therefore, would not be of much significance for the present case. similarly, the 'offer' of the state in its affidavit to appoint shaivite as archakas in shiva temples and vaishnavas in vaishanvite temples is too naive an understanding of a denomination which is, to say the least, a far more sharply indentified subgroup both in case of shaivite and vaishanvite followers. however, what cannot be ignored is the 'admission' inbuilt in the said offer resulting in some flexibility in the impugned g.o. that the state itself has acknowledged.41. sheshammal (supra) is not an authority for any proposition as to what an agama or a set of agamas governing a particular or group of temples lay down with regard to the question that confronts the court, namely, whether any particular denomination of worshippers or believers have an exclusive right to be appointed as archakas to perform the poojas. much less, has the judgment taken note of the particular class or caste to which the archakas of a temple must belong as prescribed by the agamas. all that it does and says is that some of the agamas do incorporate a fundamental religious belief of the necessity of performance of the poojas by archakas belonging to a particular and distinct sect/group/denomination, failing which, there will be defilement of deity requiring purification ceremonies. surely, if the agamas in question do not proscribe any group of citizens from being appointed as archakas on the basis of caste or class the sanctity of article 17 or any other provision of part iii of the constitution or even the protection of civil rights act, 1955 will not be violated. what has been said in sheshammal (supra) is that if any prescription with regard to appointment of archakas is made by the agamas, section 28 of the tamil nadu act mandates the trustee to conduct the temple affairs in accordance with such custom or usage. the requirement of constitutional conformity is inbuilt and if a custom or usage is outside the protective umbrella afforded and envisaged by articles 25 and 26, the law would certainly take its own course. the constitutional legitimacy, naturally, must supersede all religious beliefs or practices.42. the difficulty lies not in understanding or restating the constitutional values. there is not an iota of doubt on what they are. but to determine whether a claim of state action in furtherance thereof overrides the constitutional guarantees under article 25 and 26 may often involve what has already been referred to as a delicate and unenviable task of identifying essential religious beliefs and practices, sans which the religion itself does not survive. it is in the performance of this task that the absence of any exclusive ecclesiastical jurisdiction of this court, if not other shortcomings and adequacies, that can be felt. moreover, there is some amount of uncertainty with regard to the prescription contained in the agamas. coupled with the above is the lack of easy availability of established works and the declining numbers of acknowledged and undisputed scholars on the subject. in such a situation one is reminded of the observations, if not the caution note struck by mukherjea, j. in shirur mutt (supra) with regard to complete autonomy of a denomination to decide as to what constitutes an essential religious practice, a view that has also been subsequently echoed by this court though as a "minority view". but we must hasten to clarify that no such view of the court can be understood to an indication of any bar to judicial determination of the issue as and when it arises. any contrary opinion would go rise to large scale conflicts of claims and usages as to what is an essential religious practice with no acceptable or adequate forum for resolution. that apart the "complete autonomy" contemplated in shirur mutt (supra) and the meaning of "outside authority" must not be torn out of the context in which the views, already extracted, came to be recorded (page 1028). the exclusion of all "outside authorities" from deciding what is an essential religion practice must be viewed in the context of the limited role of the state in matters relating to religious freedom as envisaged by articles 25 and 26 itself and not of the courts as the arbiter of constitutional rights and principles.43. what then is the eventual result? the answer defies a straight forward resolution and it is the considered view of the court that the validity or otherwise of the impugned g.o. would depend on the facts of each case of appointment. what is found and held to be prescribed by one particular or a set of agamas for a solitary or a group of temples, as may be, would be determinative of the issue. in this regard it will be necessary to re-emphasise what has been already stated with regard to the purport and effect of article 16(5) of the constitution, namely, that the exclusion of some and inclusion of a particular segment or denomination for appointment as archakas would not violate article 14 so long such inclusion/exclusion is not based on the criteria of caste, birth or any other constitutionally unacceptable parameter. so long as the prescription(s) under a particular agama or agamas is not contrary to any constitutional mandate as discussed above, the impugned g.o. dated 23.05.2006 by its blanket fiat to the effect that, "any person who is a hindu and possessing the requisite qualification and training can be appointed as a archaka in hindu temples" has the potential of falling foul of the dictum laid down in seshammal (supra). a determination of the contours of a claimed custom or usage would be imperative and it is in that light that the validity of the impugned g.o. dated 23.05.2006 will have to be decided in each case of appointment of archakas whenever and wherever the issue is raised. the necessity of seeking specific judicial verdicts in the future is inevitable and unavoidable; the contours of the present case and the issues arising being what has been discussed.44. consequently and in the light of the aforesaid discussion, we dispose of all the writ petitions in terms of our findings, observations and directions above reiterating that as held in seshammal (supra) appointments of archakas will have to be made in accordance with the agamas, subject to their due identification as well as their conformity with the constitutional mandates and principles as discussed above.
s.b. sinha, j.1. how economic development of a state can be halted by a public interest litigation has received the attention of this court in some of its decisions. the case at hand adds to the said list.backdrop facts:2. the karnataka industrial area development board (hereinafter referred to as 'the board') is a statutory authority, constituted under karnataka industrial areas development act, 1966. it acquired a vast tract of land inter alia for the purpose of allotment thereof to entrepreneurs who intended to set up industries in the state of karnataka. the state of karnataka with a view to accelerate economic development of the state adopted a policy decision of dealing with the applications received from the entrepreneurs through one window system. with a view, to achieve the said objective a high level committee was constituted. b.p.l. limited (hereinafter referred to as 'the company') with a view to set up industries applied for allotment of 500 acres of land for its three projects. the said application was considered by the high level committee wherein a decision was taken to allot 17-5 acres of land in favour of the company at rs. 92/- per sq.m. the company was held to be entitled to various other incentives for the aforementioned purposes. such allotment was made by issuing an order dated 7.4.1995 out of the land acquired by it i.e. 296,26 acres in terms of notification dated 2/4th september, 1991 issued under section 28(1) of the karnataka industrial areas development act, 1966.public interest litigation:3. the respondents filed a public interest litigation questioning the said allotment inter alia on the ground that the statutory purposes for which the board can acquire the land had been breached by reason thereof. the respondent nos. 1 to 3 describing themselves to be the social workers in the writ petition raised the following contentions:(a) that the board can acquire the land only for the purposes (three in number as stated in the act).(b) that the land to other entrepreneurs is sold at the rate of rs. 3,80,000/- per acre whereas it is sold to bpl at rs. 3,72,324/-per acre.(c) that the allotment being contrary to regulations is arbitrary and unreasonable.(d) that the allotment is made without inviting applications and without notifying the availability of land to general public.(e) that the exercise of power is mala fide and suffers from legal malice.4. the contentions of the board, on the other hand, were;a) that the respondents have no locus standi to maintain the writ petition as legal rights of the general public have not been infringed."b) no notice under order 1 rule 8 of c.p.c. having been published, the writ petition was not maintainable.c) that the government of karnataka in exercise of its executive powers under article 162 of the constitution of india has established a single window agency to accord, with significant authenticity, sanction/clearance/ approval to the establishment of new industries of expansion of existing units, which include sanction of infrastructural facilities like land, power, water, finance etc. wherever an industrial project involves an investment beyond fifty crores, the decision to accord sanction/ approval/ clearance shall be taken by high level committee.d) that the high level committee constituted under the said government orders in its meeting held on 10.10.1994 and 24.1.1995 recommended that :(i) 220 acres of land be made available immediately to bpl group at dobospet industrial area for implementing colour picture tube and batteries project.(ii) additional land acquisition be initiated by the karnataka industrial area development board on the basis of justification of total land requirement of 500 acres to be furnished by the group.in its 28th meeting held on 29.3.1995, the committee took notice of the requirements of the bpl india ltd. and after thorough discussion resolved that karnataka industrial area development board (kiadb for short) shall handover 175 acres of land at dobospet industrial area to the bpl india ltd.e) that thereafter the government of karnataka by its order dated 16.5.1995 cleared the three projects of the bpl india ltd. which involved a total investment of rs.663.56 crores. the government of karnataka decided to allot 220 acres of land at dobospet industrial area.f) that an extent of 278.42 acres of private land near dobospet was acquired by the state government under section 28 (4) of kiadb act, 1966 for the purpose of development by this respondent. the final declaration is published in karnataka gazette dated 12.11.1992. a layout was planned in consultation with the director, town planning to form 28 plots of varying extent from 1 acre to 210 acres. plot no. 1 and 2 measuring 30 acres and 210 acres are reserved in favour of bpl india ltd. in the remaining 74 acres small plots are formed to accommodate non-polluting industries. an extent of 28.80 acres will be occupied by roads, civic amenities etc.g) that this respondent while developing an industrial area undertakes development work like formation of wbm roads, with block topping, drains with dick also culverts, stream water drains, drains supply through borewell, street lighting, avenue trees and drawing of high tension and low tension power line. the cost incurred has to be borne by allottees. however, the land that is allotted to bpl india ltd. has not been entirely developed and only peripheral infrastructural facilities would be provided."5. the company also filed a counter affidavit alleging that the said allotment was made pursuant to the board's resolution adopted by the single window agency. the anticipated investment of the company was rs. 600 crores. the composition of the committee was as follows:1.	additional chief secretary to government of karnataka	chairman2.	secretary to government commerce & industries department	member3.	commissioner and secretary to government, housing & urban development department	member4.	secretary to government , science & technology & ecology & environment	member5.	director of industries & commerce	member6.	chairman & managing director, karnataka state industrial investment & development corporation limited	member7.	managing director. karnataka state finance corporation	member8.	chairman, karnataka electricity board	member9.	chairman, karnataka state pollution control board	member10.	chief inspector of factories & boilers	member11 .	excise commissioner	member12.	managing director, karnataka urban water supply & drainage board	member13.	managing director, keonics	member14.	executive member, karnataka industrial areas development board	member-secretary15.	general manager (p&d), karnataka state industrial investment & development corporation limited	member-secretary16.	joint director (industrial development) industries & commerce department	member-secretary6. the application filed by the company went through various processes and several meetings of the different committees were held. the high level committee also considered the matter in a number of meetings, pursuant whereto and in furtherance whereof the aforementioned decision was taken whereafter the company deposited 99% of the cost of the allotted land amounting to rs. 6,45,05,133/- with a view to obtain possession. it was further contended that only possession of 149 acres and 5.5 guntas out of 173 acres had been delivered. a lease-cum-sale agreement in terms of the extant regulations was executed on 2.6.1995.7. various suits thereafter were filed by certain interested parties as a result whereof the company could not start its constructional activities.8. ultimately, a lease-cum-sale agreement was executed on 17.4.1996 which came into force with effect from 29.5.1995. the lease was for a period of 11 years and the yearly rent payable therefore was rs. 55,479/- and maintenance charges at rs. 74,568/-. it was stipulated that on expiry of the said period of 11 years the property would be sold to the lessee at the price fixed by the lessor.9. clause 11(b) of the said agreement to lease reads as follows:"as soon as it may be convenient the lessor will fix the price of demised premises at which it will be sold to the lessee and communicate it to the lessee and the decision of the lessor in this regard will be final and binding on the lessee. the lessee shall pay the balance of the value of the property, if any, after adjusting the premium and the total amount of rent paid by the lessee and earnest money deposit within one month from the date of receipt of communication signed by the lessor or any other officer authorised in this behalf by the lessor. on the other hand, if any sum is determined as payable by the lessor to the lessee after the adjustment as aforesaid, such sum shall be refunded to the lessee before the date of execution of the sale deed."10. the appellants also contended before the high court that the writ petitioners-respondents had been set up by the persons whose lands had been acquired. they were members of political parties also.directions by the high court:11. the high court called for the entire records. upon consideration of the rival pleadings as also the records of the case, the writ petition filed by the respondents herein was allowed directing:"(a) quash the allotment of land made by this petitioner in favour of bpl india ltd. only in so far as excess land than the land actually utilised so far by the bpl india at any rate not exceeding 30 acres.(b) this petitioner is directed to recover possession of remaining land forthwith.(c) after recovering possession, this petitioner is directed to form industrial plots and allot the same to prospective industrialist after notifying and inviting applications.(d) in respect of land that is left with the bpl india ltd., this petitioner shall work out the cost of such, land at the rate of rs. 8 lakhs per acre and after adjusting the amount already paid by bpl india, shall refund the balance amount to bpl india together with interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date of receipt of the amount.(e) in order to ascertain the actual utilization of land by bpl india so far the assistant director of land record was directed to conduct survey of the land which is actually utilized by the bpl india ltd. in the presence of petitioner and the respondents, prepare a sketch thereof and earmark the boundaries so that the board can recover possession of rest of the land from the bpl india ltd.(f) the cost of rs. 10,000/- was awarded to writ petitioners to be paid by this petitioner."statutes operating in the field:12. it is not in dispute that the matter relating to allotment of industrial land is governed by karnataka industrial areas development act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as 'the act'). the appellant-board has been constituted thereunder. in terms of the said act, the state government is empowered to acquire land and to handover the same to the board for development and allotment to eligible industries. the relevant provisions of the said act are as under:"17. directions by state government:the state government may issue to the board such directions of a general nature as it may think necessary or expedient for the purpose of carrying out the purposes of this act and the board shall be, bound to follow and act upon such directions.41. power to make regulations:(1) the board may, with the previous approval of the state government, by notification make regulations consistent with this act and the rules made hereunder, to carry out the purposes of this act.(2) in particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for.-(a) ......(b) the terms and conditions under which the board may dispose of land."13. pursuant to and in furtherance of the power conferred upon the state, regulations were framed known as 'regulations governing the disposal of land by the karnataka industrial area development board'. regulations 7 and 13 of the said regulations which are relevant for the purpose of this case are as under:"7. inviting applications:the board shall notify the availability of land, the manner of disposal, the last date for submission of applications and such other particulars as the board may consider necessary in each case by giving wide publicity through newspapers having circulation in and outside karnataka state and invite applications from industries or persons intending to start industries.13. allotment of plots in special cases:notwithstanding anything contained in these regulations the board in consultation with the state government may allot any plot or area other than those in respect of which applications are called for under regulations 7 to any individual or company for the establishment, of an industry or for the provision for any amenity required in the industrial area."submissions:14. mr. mukul rohtagi, the learned addl. solicitor general and mr. d.a. dave, the learned senior counsel, appearing for the appellants would submit that the high court committed a manifest error in passing the impugned judgment insofar as it entered into the question of validity or otherwise of the policy decision adopted by the state. the learned counsel would submit that the requirements of the company for setting up its industrial units can be judged by the experts where for high level committee was constituted and, thus the high court could not sit in appeal there over, it was urged that the high court further committed a manifest error by arriving at the conclusion that the state had shown undue haste in the matter of grant of allotment and that too at a price of rs. 3,72,324/- per acre although it received the consideration of rs. 8,00,000/- per acre from another entrepreneur.15. the learned counsel would further urge that the high court has failed to consider that the writ petitioners had no locus standi to file the writ application as they had been set up by those whose lands had been acquired. it was pointed out that whereas the lands were allotted on 7.4.1995, the writ petition having been filed on 11.11.1996 suffered from gross delay and laches and in that view of the matter too the high court should have refused to exercise its jurisdiction in favour of the appellants particularly in view of the fact that the company in the meantime have changed their position by investing about rs. 80/- crores.16. mr. t.l.v. iyer, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the other hand, would submit that the purported allotment was made in favour of the company by the board without making any enquiry as regard the area of the land it actually needed nor there had been any application of mind in relation thereto. the property having been acquired under a statute is a public property, contends mr. iyer, and being trustees thereof, the board was required to take extreme care and caution in relation thereto. it was contended that the high court had rightly found that for all intent and purport such vast tract of land had been sold to the company although apparently allotted for a period of 11 years and thereafter the company would be entitled to obtain sale deed in relation to the demised land. at the relevant time, mr. iyer argued, neither any project report had been submitted by the company nor any material was placed to show that the company required such vast tract of land.scope of the public interest litigation:17. the company intended to set up more than one unit. for the purpose of achieving the objective of economic development of the state, the state is entitled to deal with the applications of the entrepreneurs in an appropriate manner. for the said purpose a high level committee was constituted. the said committee held its meeting on 10.10.1994 wherein not only the members referred to hereinbefore but also various other officers were present. presumably, prior thereto the applications filed by the company were scrutinized by the competent authorities. after detailed discussions, the high level committee resolved:(a) to permit the unit to change the location from malur indl. area to dobespet industrial area:(b) to allot a total of 500 acres of land for the three projects viz., colour picture tube, colour televisions and battery in dobespet industrial area. nelamangala tq., in lieu of the earlier allotment of 100 acres of land at malur indl. area for the colour tv sets project, subject to the promoters indicating the individual land requirement for colour picture tubs project, colour tv project and the battery project duly justifying the requirement with necessary plans, block diagrams, etc.18. as regard incentives, it was resolved:"(3) incentives: the hlc resolved to offer the following incentives:100% exemption of sales tax (kst, cst & turnover tax) on sale of finished goods for a period of 8 years or deferment for a period of 10 years from the date of commencement of commercial production subject to a limit of 100% of the value of the fixed assets, the present level of st revenue from the company from tv manufacturing is to be maintained.(ii) exemption from payment of purchase tax (st on purchase by the co) on capital goods/ equipment worth more than rs. 1,00 crore (rupees one crore) in each individual case during the construction phase of the project."19. similar considerations were made in respect of colour television picture tube project of the company and manufacture of batteries. the matter relating to allotment of land is a statutory function on the part of the board, in terms of the provisions of the act, consultations with the state government is required if regulation 13 of the regulations in place of regulation 7 is to be taken recourse to. does it mean that consultations must be held in a particular manner, i.e., by exchange of correspondences and in no other? answer to the said questions must be rendered in negative. the high level committee was chaired by the minister who in terms of the rules of executive business framed under article 166 of the constitution of india was entitled to represent the state. once a consultation takes place by mutual discussions and a consensus is arrived at between different authorities performing different functions under the statutes, the purpose for which consultation was to be made would stand satisfied. under the act or the regulations framed thereunder, no procedure for holding such consultations had been laid down. in that situation it was open to the competent authorities to evolve their own procedure. such a procedure of taking a decision upon deliberations does not fall foul of article 14 of the constitution of india. no malice of fact has been alleged in the instant case. the high court has proceeded to pronounce its judgment inter alia on the ground that the price of the land should have been fixed at rs. 8,00,000/- per acre. in support of the said decision, the high court has relied upon a grant at the aforementioned rate. however, it was pointed out by the board:"it is submitted that the land allotted to respondent no. 4 was not fully developed by this petitioner except some infrastructural facilities which have been counted while calculating the price of the land. the land allotted to individual entrepreneurs is fully developed with all infrastructural facilities. there cannot be any equality between unequals. the cost of the land is arrived at by this petitioner taking into consideration the cost of acquisition, cost of partial development, service and establishment charges."20. this aspect of the matter did not receive due attention of the high court despite its merit.21. it is a well-settled principle of law that different considerations arise for the purpose of fixation of price in respect of price of land i.e. for a small area vis-a-vis, a large area. the allotment price was rs. rs. 3,72,324/- per acre which, having regard to the policy decision of the state as also the facts and circumstances of the case cannot be said to be wholly arbitrary warranting interference by the court. there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that normally allotment of such industrial plots should be done in terms of regulation 7 aforementioned. but the same by itself did not preclude the authorities of the board and the state having regard to the fact situation obtaining herein to take recourse to regulation 13. once the court finds that the power exercised by the statutory authorities can be traced to a provision of statute, unless and until violation of mandatory provisions thereof are found out and/ or it is held that a decision is taken for unauthorized or illegal purpose, the court will not ordinarily interfere either with the policy decision or any decision taken by the executive authorities pursuant to or in furtherance thereof.22. malice in common law or acceptance means ill will against a person, but in legal sense means a wrongful act done intentionally without just cause or excuse.case laws operating in the field:23. in g.b. mahajan and ors. v. jalgaon municipal council and ors. manu/sc/0284/1991manu/sc/0284/1991 : air1991sc1153 , this court stated:"46. while it is true that principles of judicial review apply to the exercise by a government body of its contractual powers, the inherent limitations on the scope of the inquiry are themselves a part of those principles. for instance, in a matter even as between the parties, there must be shown a public law element to the contractual decision before judicial review is invoked. in the present case the material placed before the court falls far short of what the law requires to justify interference."24. in tata cellular v. union of india manu/sc/0002/1996manu/sc/0002/1996 : air1996sc11 , the court laid down the following principles in the matter of judicial review:"94. the principles deducible from the above are :(1) the modern trend points to judicial restraint in administrative action.(2) the court does not sit as a court of appeal but merely reviews the manner in which the decision was made.(3) the court does not have the expertise to correct the administrative decision. if a review of the administrative decision is permitted it will be substituting its own decision, without the necessary expertise which itself may be fallible.(4) the terms of the invitation to tender cannot be open to judicial scrutiny because the invitation to tender is in the realm of contract. [normally speaking the decision to accept the tender or award the contract is reached by process of negotiations through several tiers. more often than not such decisions are made qualitatively by experts.(5) the government must have freedom of contract. in other words, a fair play in the joints is a necessary concomitant for an administrative body functioning in an administrative sphere or quasi-administrative sphere. however, the decision must not only be tested by the application of wednesbury principle of reasonableness (including its other facts pointed out above) but must be free from arbitrariness not affected by bias or actuated by mala fides.(6) quashing decisions may impose heavy administrative burden, on the administration and lead to increased and unbudgeted expenditure."25. in m.p. oil extraction and anr. v. state of m.p. and ors. manu/sc/1302/1997manu/sc/1302/1997 : (1997)7scc592 , this court observed: ""44. the renewal clause in the impugned agreements executed in favour of the respondents does not also appear to be unjust or improper. whether protection by way of supply of sal seeds under the terms of agreement requires to be continued for a further period, is a matter for decision by the state government and unless such decision is patently arbitrary, interference by the court is not called for. in the facts of the case, the decision of the state government to extend the protection for further period cannot be held to be per se irrational, arbitrary or capricious warranting judicial review of such policy decision. therefore, the high court has rightly rejected the appellant's contention about the invalidity of the renewal clause. the appellants failed in earlier attempts to challenge the validity of the agreement including the renewal clause. the subsequent challenge of the renewal clause, therefore, should not be entertained unless it can be clearly demonstrated that the fact situation has undergone such changes that the discretion in the matter of renewal of agreement should not be exercised by the state, it has been rightly contended by dr. singhvi that the respondents legitimately expect that the renewal clause should be given effect to in usual manner and according to past practice unless there is any special reason not to adhere to such practice. the doctrine of "legitimate expectation" has been judicially recognised by this court in a number of decisions. the doctrine of "legitimate expectation" operates in the domain of public law and in an appropriate case, constitutes a substantive and enforceable right."26. it was further pointed out:"45. although to ensure fair play and transparency in state action, distribution of largesse by inviting open tenders or by public auction is desirable, it cannot be held that in no case distribution of such largesse by negotiation is permissible. in the instant case, as a policy decision protective measure by entering into agreements with selected industrial units for assured supply of sal seeds at concessional rate has been taken by the government. the rate of royalty has also been fixed on some accepted principle of pricing formula as will be indicated hereafter. hence, distribution or allotment of sal seeds at the determined royalty to the respondents and other units covered by the agreements cannot be assailed. it is to be appreciated that in this case, distribution by public auction or by open tender may not achieve the purpose of the policy of protective measure by way of supply of sal seeds at concessional rate of royalty to the industrial units covered by the agreements on being selected on valid and objective considerations."27. in netaj bag and ors. v. state of w.b. and ors. manu/sc/0604/2000manu/sc/0604/2000 : air2000sc3313 , sethi j. speaking for the bench observed:"though the state cannot escape its liability to show its actions to be fair, reasonable and in accordance with law yet wherever challenge is thrown to any of such action, initial burden of showing the prima facie existence of violation of the mandate of the constitution lies upon the person approaching the court. we have found in this case, that the appellants have miserably failed to place on record or to point out to any alleged constitutional vice or illegality. neither the high court nor this court would have ventured to make a rowing inquiry particularly in a writ petition filed at the instance of the erstwhile owners of the land, whose main object appeared to get the land back by any means as, admittedly, with the passage of time and development of the area, the value of the land had appreciated manifold. it may be noticed that in the year 1981 the erstwhile owners were paid about rs. 5.5 lakhs and the state government assessed the market value of the property which was paid by respondent 5 at rs. 71,59,820. the appellants have themselves stated that the value of the land roundabout the time, when it was leased to respondent 5 was about rs. 11 crores. there cannot be any dispute with the proposition that generally when any state land is intended to be transferred or the state largesse decided to be conferred, resort should be had to public auction or transfer by way of inviting tenders from the people, that would be a sure method of guaranteeing compliance with the mandate of article 14 of the constitution. non-floating of tenders or not holding of public auction would not in all cases be deemed to be the result of the exercise of the executive power in an arbitrary manner. making an exception to the general rule could be justified by the state executive, if challenged in appropriate proceedings. the constitutional courts cannot be expected to presume the alleged irregularities, illegalities or unconstitutionally nor the courts can substitute their opinion for the bona fide opinion of the state executive. the courts are not concerned with the ultimate decision but only with the fairness of the decision-making process.in the backdrop of the legal position noticed herein, it has to be seen, in the instant case, as to whether the action of respondent 1 was illegal, arbitrary or mala fide. to justify their action of entering into an agreement of lease by negotiation, even in the absence, of pleadings on behalf of the appellants, the state has submitted that the entire transaction of granting the lease to respondent 5 for an integrated food processing unit with an abattoir in a semi-rural area, which was a low-lying land, despite their best efforts, the state government were unable to set up any project. the lease was given to respondent 5 upon consideration of all the facts and circumstances with the object of setting up an industry in the state of west bengal which was likely to generate employment to more than 300 persons and earn foreign exchange worth more than rs. 50 crores. the negotiations were resorted to ensure the disposal of the slaughterhouse at durgapur which was proved to have been running in losses. the respondent state had failed to get any buyer for durgapur project despite newspaper advertisements.in view of the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case we are not persuaded to hold that the action of the respondent state in executing the lease deed with respondent 5 was unreasonable, illegal, arbitrary or actuated by extraneous considerations. in this regard it is worth noticing that none except the erstwhile owners and the propounders of vegetarianism have made any grievance to the effect that the market value of the property, as charged from respondent 5, was either allegedly for a song or at a throwaway price."28. in raunag international ltd. v. i.v.r. construction ltd. and ors. manu/sc/0770/1998manu/sc/0770/1998 : air1999sc393 it was held:"11. when a writ petition is filed in the high court challenging the award of a contract by a public authority or the state, the court must be satisfied that there is some element of public interest involved in entertaining such a petition. if, for example, the dispute is purely between two tenderers, the court must be very careful to see if there is any element of public interest involved in the litigation. a mere difference in the prices offered by the two tenderers may or may not be decisive in deciding whether any public interest is involved in intervening in such a commercial transaction. it is important to bear in mind that by court intervention, the proposed project may be considerably delayed thus escalating the cost far more than any saying which the court would ultimately effect in public money by deciding the dispute in favour of one tenderer or the other tenderer. therefore, unless the court is satisfied that there is a substantial amount of public interest, or the transaction is entered into mala fide, the court should not intervene under article 226 in disputes between two rival tenderers.12. when a petition is filed as a public interest litigation challenging the award of a contract by the state or any public body to a particular tenderer, the court must satisfy itself that the party which has brought the litigation is litigating bona fide for public good. the public interest, litigation should not be merely a cloak for attaining private ends or a third party or of the party bringing the petition. the court can examine the previous record of public service rendered by the organisation bringing public interest litigation. even when a public interest litigation is entertained, the court must be careful to weigh conflicting public interests before intervening. intervention by the court may ultimately result in delay in the execution of the project. the obvious consequence of such delay is price escalation. if any reentering is prescribed, cost of the project can escalate substantially. what is more important is that ultimately the public would have to pay a much higher price in the form of delay in the commissioning of the project and the consequent delay in the contemplated public, service becoming available to the public. if it is a power project which is thus delayed, the public may lose substantially because of shortage in electricity supply and the consequent obstruction in industrial development, if the project is for the construction of a road or an irrigation canal, the delay in transportation facility becoming available or the delay in water supply for agriculture being available, can be a substantial setback to the country's economic development. where the decision has been taken bona fide and a choice has been exercised on legitimate considerations and not arbitrarily, there is no reason why the court should entertain a petition under article 226."13. hence before entertaining a writ petition and passing any interim orders in such petitions, the court must carefully weigh conflicting public interests. only when it comes to a conclusion that there is an overwhelming public interest in entertaining the petition, the court should intervene.14. where there is an allegation of mala fides or an allegation that the contract has been entered into for collateral purposes and the court is satisfied on the material before it that the allegation needs further examination, the court would be entitled to entertain the petition. but even here, the court must weigh the consequences in balance before granting interim orders."29. in narmada bachao andolan v. union of india and ors. manu/sc/0640/2000manu/sc/0640/2000 : air2000sc3751 this court opined:"47. the project, in principle, was cleared more than 25 years ago when the foundation stone was laid by late pandit jawahar lal nehru. thereafter, there was an agreement of the four chief ministers in 1974, namely, the chief ministers of madhya pradesh, gujarat, maharashtra and rajasthan for the project to be undertaken. then dispute arose with regard to the height of the dam which was settled with the award of the tribunal being given in 1978. for a number of years, thereafter, final clearance was still not given. in the meantime some environmental studies were conducted. the final clearance was not given because of the environmental concern which is quite evident. even though complete data with regard to the environment was not available, the government did in 1987 finally give environmental clearance. it is thereafter that the construction of the dam was undertaken and hundreds of crores have been invested before the petitioner chose to file a writ petition in 1994 challenging the decision to construct the dam and the clearance as was given. in our opinion, the petitioner which had been agitating against the dam since 1986 is guilty of laches in not approaching the court at an earlier point of time."30. in balco employees' union (read.) v. union of india and ors. manu/sc/0779/2001manu/sc/0779/2001 : (2002)illj550sc . it was held:"public interest litigation, or pil as it is more commonly known, entered the indian judicial process in 1970. it will not be incorrect to say that it is primarily the judges who have innovated this type of litigation as there was a dire need for it. at that stage, it was intended to vindicate public interest where fundamental and other rights of the people who were poor, ignorant or in socially or economically disadvantageous position and were unable to seek legal redress were required to be espoused. pil was not meant, to be adversarial in nature and was to be a cooperative and collaborative effort of the parties and the court so as to secure justice for the poor and the weaker sections of the community who were not in a position to protect their own interests. public interest litigation was intended to mean nothing more than what words themselves said viz. "litigation in the interest of the public".while pil initially was invoked mostly in cases connected with the relief to the people and the weaker sections of the society and in areas where there was violation of human rights under article 21, but with the passage of time, petitions have been entertained in other spheres, prof, s.b. sathe has summarised the extent of the jurisdiction which has now been exercised in the following words :"pil may, therefore, be described as satisfying one or more of the following parameters. these are not exclusive but merely descriptive :- where the concerns underlying a petition are not individualist but are shared widely by a large number of people (bonded labour, undertrial prisoners, prison inmates).- where the affected persons belong to the disadvantaged sections of society (women, children, bonded labour, unorganised labour etc).- where judicial law making is necessary to avoid exploitation (inter-country adoption, the education of the children of the prostitutes).- where judicial intervention is necessary for the protection of the sanctity of democratic institutions (independence of the judiciary, existence of grievances redressal forums).- where administrative decisions related to development, are harmful to the environment and jeopardize people's right to natural resources such as air or water."there is, in recent years, a feeling which is not without any foundation that public interest litigation is now tending to become publicity interest litigation or private interest litigation and has a tendency to be counterproductive. pil is not a pill or a panacea for all wrongs. it was essentially meant to protect basic human rights of the weak and the disadvantaged and was a procedure which was innovated where a public--spirited person files, a petition in effect on behalf of such persons who on account of poverty, helplessness or economic and social disabilities could not approach the court for relief. there, have been, in recent times, increasingly instances of abuse of pil. therefore, there is a need to re-emphasize the parameters within which pil can be resorted to by a petitioner and entertained by the court. this aspect has come up for consideration before this court and all we need to do is to recapitulate and re-emphasize the same."31. the extent of the court's jurisdiction to entertain a public interest litigation has been pointed out by this court in guruvayur devaswom managing committee and anr. v. c.k. rajan and ors. manu/sc/0582/2003manu/sc/0582/2003 : (2003)7scc546 , after referring to a large number of decisions, this court held:"it is trite, where a segment of public is not interested in the cause, public interest litigation would not ordinarily be entertained.existence of certain gray areas may not be ruled out but such a case was required to be made out before the high court which has not been done in the instant case. for any court of law including this court, it is difficult to draw a strict line of demarcation as to which matters and to what extent a public interest litigation should be entertained but, as noticed hereinbefore, the decisions of this court render broad guidelines. this court and the high court should, unless there exists strong reasons to deviate or depart therefrom, not undertake an unnecessary journey through the public interest litigation path.the high court should not have proceeded simply to supplant, ignore or by-pass the statute. the high court has not shown any strong and cogent reasons for an administrator to continue in an office even after expiry of his tenure. it appears from the orders dated 7th february, 1993 that the high court without cogent and sufficient reason allowed administrator to continue in office although his term was over and he was posted elsewhere. he also could not have been conferred powers wider than section 17 of the act. the high court took over the power of appointment of the commissioner bypassing the procedure set out in the act by calling upon the government to furnish the names of 5 ias officers to the court so that it could exercise the power of appointment of the commissioner.the court should be circumspect in entertaining such public interest litigation for another reason. there may be dispute amongst the devotees as to what practices should be followed by the temple authorities. there may be dispute as regard the rites and rituals to be performed in the temple or omission thereof. any decision in favour of one sector of the people may heart the sentiments of the other. the courts normally, thus, at the first instance would not enter into such disputed arena, particularly, when by reason thereof the fundamental right of a group of devotees under articles 25 and 26 may be infringed. like any other wing of the state, the courts also while passing an order should ensure that the fundamental rights of a group of citizens under "articles 25 arid 26 are not infringed. such care and caution on the part of the high court would be a welcome step.where access to justice poses a fundamental problem facing the third world today, its importance in india has increased. laws are designed to improve the socio-economic conditions of the poor but making the law is not enough, it must be implemented. the core issues which have been highlighted by the learned counsels by the party must be considered from that angle. administration of temple by entertaining complaints does not lead to a happy state of affairs. roving enquiry is not contemplated. principles of natural justice and fair play ought to be followed even in the pro bono public proceedings. the courts undoubtedly would be parens patriae in relation to idols, but when the statute governs the field and the state takes over the management, ordinarily the courts would not step in.32. it was further held:"mr. subba rao referred to n.m. thomas (supra) for the proposition that court is also a 'state' within the meaning of article 12 but that would not mean that in a given case the court shall assume the role of the executive government of the state. statutory functions are assigned to the state by the legislature and not by the court. the courts while exercising its jurisdiction ordinarily must remind itself about the doctrine of separation of powers which, however although does not mean that the court shall not step-in in any circumstance whatsoever but the court while exercising its power must also remind itself about the rule of self-restraint. the courts, as indicated hereinbefore, ordinarily is reluctant to assume the functions of the statutory functionaries. it allows them to perform their duties at the first instance.the court steps in by mandamus when the state fails to perform its duty. it shall also step in when the discretion is exercised but the same has not been done legally and validly. it steps in by way of a judicial review ever the orders passed. existence of alternative remedy albeit is no bar to exercise jurisdiction under article 226 of the constitution of india but ordinarily it will not do so unless it is found that an order has been passed wholly without jurisdiction or contradictory to the constitutional or statutory provisions or where an order has been passed without complying with the principles of natural justice. (see whirlpool corporation v. registrar of trade marks mumbai and ors. manu/sc/0664/1998manu/sc/0664/1998 : air1999sc22 ).exercise of self-restraint, thus, should be adhered to, subject of course to, just exceptions."33. dawn oliver in constitutional reform in the uk under the heading 'the courts and theories of democracy, citizenship, and good governance', at page 105 states:"however, this concept of democracy as rights-based with limited governmental power, and in particular of the role of the courts in a democracy, carries high, risks for the judges - and for the public, courts may interfere in advisedly in public administration. the case of bromley london borough council v. greater london council [1983] 1 ac 768 is a classic example. the house of lords quashed the glc cheap fares policy as being based on a misreading of the statutory provisions, but were accused of themselves misunderstanding transport policy in so doing. the courts are not experts in policy and public administration - hence jowell's point that the courts should not step beyond their institutional capacity (jewell, 2000). acceptance of this approach is reflected in the judgments of laws lj in international transport roth gmbh v. secretary of state for the horns department [2002] ewca civ 158, [2002] 3 wlr 344 and of lord nimmo smith in adams v. lord advocate (court of session, times, 8 august 2002) in which a distinction was drawn between areas where the subject matter lies within the expertise of the courts (for instance, criminal justice, including sentencing and detention of individuals) and those which were more appropriate for decision by democratically elected and accountable bodies. if the courts step outside the area of their institutional competence, government may react by getting parliament to legislate to oust the jurisdiction of the courts altogether. such a step would underline the rule of law government and public opinion may come to question the legitimacy of the judges exercising judicial review against ministers and thus undermine the authority of the courts and the rule of law."conclusions:34. salient principles of law as noticed hereinbefore, were not considered by the high court in passing the impugned judgment.35. in the facts and circumstances, we do not find that the board and the state had committed any illegality which could have been a subject matter of judicial review. the high court in bur opinion committed a manifest error insofar as it failed to take into consideration that the delay in this case had defeated equity. the allotment was made in the year 1995. the writ application was filed after one year. by that time the company had not only took possession of the land but also made sufficient investment. delay of this nature shall have been considered by the high court to be of vital importance.36. furthermore, the high court ought to have taken into consideration the factum of resistance in the matter from those persons whose lands have been acquired. only because the lands are vested in the state upon acquisition thereof, the same by itself would not mean that the persons whose lands were acquired were not interested in getting the allotment. the locus standi of the respondent ought to have been taken into consideration having regard to the specific pleas raised in this behalf by the appellants- herein.37. undue haste also is a matter which by itself would not have been a ground for exercise of power of judicial review unless it is held to be malafide. what is necessary in such matters is not the time taken for allotment but the manner in which the action had been taken. the court, it is trite, is not concerned with the merit of the decision but the decision making process. in absence of any finding that any legal malice was committed, the impugned allotment of land could not have been interfered with. what was only necessary to, be seen was as to whether there had been a fair play in action.38. the question as to whether any undue haste has been shown in taking an administrative decision is essentially a question of fact. the states had devolved a policy of single window system with a view to get rid of red-tapism generally prevailing in the bureaucracy. a decision which has been taken after due deliberations and upon due application of mind cannot be held to be suffering from malice in law on the ground that there had been undue haste on the part of the state and the board. [see bangalore medical trust v. b.s. muddappa and ors. manu/sc/0426/1991manu/sc/0426/1991 : [1991]3scr102 and pfizer ltd. v. mazdoor congress and ors. manu/sc/0660/1996manu/sc/0660/1996 : (1996)iillj891sc ]39. for the aforementioned reasons, we are of the opinion that the impugned judgment cannot be sustained which is set aside accordingly. these appeals are allowed. no costs.
ruma pal, j.1. i regret my inability to concur with the conclusion reached by my learned brother, pattanaik j, that because of the enactment of the tobacco board act, 1975 by parliament, the state act viz., the bihar agricultural produce markets act, 1960 in so far as it relates to levy of fee on the sale and purchase of tobacco, is invalid.2. that the legislative power of parliament in certain areas is para mount under the constitution is not in dispute. what is in dispute is the limits of those areas as judicially defined. broadly speaking parliamentary paramountcy is provided for under articles 246 and 254 of the constitution. the first three clauses of article 246 of the constitution relate to the demarcation of legislative powers between the parliament and the state legislatures. under clause (1), notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (2) and (3), parliament has been given the exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list i or the union list in the seventh schedule. clause (2) empowers the parliament, and state legislatures subject to the power of parliament under sub-clause (1), to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list iii in the seventh schedule described in the constitution as the 'concurrent list' notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (3). under clause (3) the state legislatures have been given exclusive powers to make laws in respect of matters enumerated in list ii in the seventh schedule described as the 'state list' but subject to clauses (1) and (2). the three lists while enumerating in detail the legislative subjects carefully distribute the areas of legislative authority between parliament (list i) and the state (list ii). the supremacy of parliament has been provided for by the non obstante clause in article 246(1) and the words 'subject to' in article 246(2) and (3). therefore, under article 246(1) if any of the entries in the three lists overlap, the entry in list i will prevail. additionally some of the entries in the state list have been made expressly subject to the power of parliament to legislate either under list i or under list iii. entries in the lists of the seventh schedule have been liberally interpreted, nevertheless courts have been wary of upsetting this balance by a process of interpretation so as to deprive any entry of its content and reduce it to 'useless lumber'. the use of the word 'exclusive' in clause (3) denotes that within the legislative fields contained in list ii, the state legislatures exercise authority as plenary and ample as parliament. the fact that under the scheme of our constitution, greater power is conferred upon the center vis-a-vis the states does not mean that states are mere appendages of the center. within the sphere allotted to them, states are supreme. the center cannot tamper with their powers. more particularly, the courts should not adopt an approach, an interpretation, which has the effect of or tends to have the effect of whittling down the powers reserved to the states".3. although parliament cannot legislate on any of the entries in the state list, it may do so incidentally while essentially legislating within the entries under the union list. conversely, the state legislatures may encroach on the union list, when such an encroachment is merely ancillary to an exercise of power intrinsically under the state list. the fact of encroachment does not affect the vires of the law even as regards the area of encroachment. this principle commonly known as the doctrine of path and substance, does not amount to an extension of the legislative fields. therefore, such incidental encroachment in either event does not deprive the state legislature in the first case or parliament in the second, of their exclusive powers under the entry so encroached upon. in the event the incidental encroachment conflicts with legislation actually enacted by the dominant power, the dominant legislation will prevail.4. to return to the subject of parliamentary supremacy. the second facet of the supremacy of parliament is to be found in article 254(1) which provides:article 254: "inconsistency between laws made by parliament and laws made by the legislatures of states - (1) if any provision of a law made by the legislature of a state is repugnant to any provision of a law made by parliament which parliament is competent to enact, or to any provision of an existing law with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the concurrent list, then, subject to the provisions of clause (2), the law made by parliament, whether passed before or after the law made by the legislature of such state, or, as the case may be, the existing law, shall prevail and the law made by the legislature of the state shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void."5. in other words where in due exercise of legislative powers in the concurrent list there is an irreconcilable conflict in the legislations enacted, the central legislation will prevail. the doctrine of repugnancy has been developed in this context. [see: m/s hoechst pharmaceuticals ltd. v. state of bihar manu/sc/0392/1983manu/sc/0392/1983 : [1985]154itr64(sc) deep chand v. the state of uttar pradesh manu/sc/0023/1959manu/sc/0023/1959 : air1959sc648 ]. the controversy, in this case, is to be resolved keeping these broad principles in mind.6. the immediate question before us is whether the tobacco board act, 1975 debars the states from levying market fee in respect of tobacco. in the several matters argued and heard, the main protagonists were the tobacco traders and dealers on the one hand who argue that the states cannot levy market fee on tobacco, and the market committees on the other who contend to the contrary. the union of india and the tobacco board have supported the former while the state governments the latter. the details of the several matters which were heard by us have been noted in the opinion of pattanaik, j. a galaxy of counsel have made submissions in support of the opposing camps. for the purpose of convenience and coherence, the diverse arguments have been clubbed together and those contending against the states competence are referred to compendiously as the appellants and their opponents as 'the respondents'. one further clarification is necessary. as the order referring the issue to this court was passed in an appeal relating to the bihar agricultural markets act, 1960, although several other states have enacted substantially similar statutes, i will treat the bihar statute as representative and refer to the provisions of that act for deciding the issues.7. the bihar agricultural produce markets act, 1960 (referred to hereafter as the markets act) was enacted by the state of bihar and is ostensibly referable to entry 28 of list ii which gives the state legislature the exclusive power to legislate on "markets and fairs" read with entry 66 of list ii according to which the state legislature may also levy fees in respect of any matter in list ii except court fees. it is true that in belsund sugar company v. state of bihar the court proceeded on the basis that the markets act had been enacted by the bihar legislature not only under the legislative power vested in it by entry 28 but also under entries 26 and 27 of list ii of the seventh schedule of the constitution but in that case, there does not appear to have been any controversy raised on this point. entries 26 and 27 of list ii read as under:26. trade and commerce within the state subject to the provisions of entry 33 of list iii.27. production, supply and distribution of goods subject to the provisions of entry 33 of list iii."8. it has also been argued by the respondents that the state act is also referable to entry 14 of list ii which describes the permissible subject matter of legislation by states as:14: agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against pest and prevention of plant diseases.9. except for entries 26 and 27 of list ii, each of the other entries comes within the exclusive legislative domain of the states.10. the tobacco board act, 1975, on the other hand, is claimed by the appellants to be relatable solely to entry 52 of list i which enables parliament to legislate on "industries, the control of which by the union is declared by parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest". according to the appellants, the markets act seeks to regulate, inter-alia, the sale of various kinds of agricultural produce including tobacco. they contend that the provisions of the markets act could not be applied to tobacco because the tobacco act was enacted by parliament under entry 52 of list i to control and regulate everything relating to the tobacco industry from the growth of tobacco to its processing, storing, sale, manufacture, export and import.11. it had been initially argued by the appellants that once a declaration is made in terms of entry 52 of the union list, the industry in respect of which the declaration is made and the entire process relating thereto becomes part of the legislative head itself and within the exclusive domain of the parliament, and the state legislature becomes incompetent to enact any provision with regard to that industry. the submission was somewhat watered down in the reply. it was conceded that the argument was an extreme one and that the true principle was that one has to examine the actual extent of coverage by the central enactment. the next submission was that the word 'industry' in entry 52 of list i will have to be given a wide meaning. passages from the encyclopaedia britannica were referred to, to contend that an 'industry' could be primary, secondary or tertiary. primary industries would include agriculture, forestry, fishing, mining and the extraction of minerals etc. a secondary industry would be a manufacturing industry where raw materials supplied by primary industries are processed to manufacture consumer and non-consumer goods. a tertiary industry would be one where services were rendered such as banking, insurance, transportation, information etc. this was contrasted with the meaning of the word as defined in the industries, development and regulation act, 1951 which only deals with manufacturing industries. according to the appellants, this court in harakchand ratanchand banthia and ors. v. union of india manu/sc/0038/1969manu/sc/0038/1969 : [1970]1scr479 not only accepted the wide definition of industries but also specifically held that the word 'industry' in entry 52 would also comprise production, supply and distribution of goods referred to in entry 27 of list ii. it was, therefore, contended that the provisions of the tobacco act were clearly within the exclusive competence of parliament and within the field covered in entry 52 of list i. as a corollary to this argument, it was contended that parliament could also legislate with regard to the raw materials supplied to a declared industry in keeping with the principle of 'pith and substance'. the next submission was that even if the state government retained the competence to legislate on tobacco, it could not enact any statutory provisions which would be repugnant to the central act. the provisions of the tobacco act and the markets act were referred to in some detail to contend that they could not possibly co-exist and therefore the central act would have to prevail. it was submitted that in the circumstances the provisions of the markets act with respect to tobacco were repugnant to the provisions of the tobacco act an that by virtue of the provisions of article 254(1) of the constitution, the law made by parliament was to prevail and the law made by the legislatures of the state to the extent of the repugnancy with the central act, is void.12. the respondents on the other hand contended that the tobacco act did not and could not occupy the entire legislative field relating to tobacco. according to them, despite the declaration in section 2 of the tobacco act under entry 52 of list i, the word 'industry' in the context of the tobacco act could not include anything more than processing and manufacturing of tobacco. reliance was placed primarily on the decision of the constitution bench in tika ramji and ors. v. state of u.p. and ors. manu/sc/0008/1956manu/sc/0008/1956 : [1956]1scr393 .13. it was further submitted on behalf of the respondents that the question of repugnancy between the markets act and the tobacco act would not arise since parliament was not competent to enact provisions in respect of a legislative field specifically provided for in list ii. it was submitted that the legislative field under entry 52 of list i was derived from entry 24 of list ii and entry 24 did not cover the legislative fields otherwise specially provided for in list ii. it was stated that entry 28 could not be rendered redundant by the central government's legislation on commodities sold at markets and fairs by issuing a declaration under entry 52 of list i. it was also submitted that there may be provisions in the tobacco act which may incidentally trench on the state's competence and as long as states have not legislated on that topic, the tobacco act may prevail. it was submitted that even if the markets act were enacted under entries 26 and 27 of list ii nevertheless this would not make the market act invalid as far as tobacco was concerned. it was further submitted that although entries 26 and 27 in the state list were subject to the provisions of entry 33 of the concurrent list, there was no provision in entry 33 of the concurrent list which covered tobacco. it was submitted that the issue of repugnancy did not arise because article 254(1) only relates to repugnancy in actual legislations in respect of entries in the concurrent list. according to the respondents, assuming that parliament was competent to legislate in respect of tobacco, there was in fact no repugnancy between the markets act and the tobacco act as the tobacco act did not cover post auction sales. in any event, there could be no conflict between the markets act and the central act in bihar particularly having regard to the fact that section 13 13a and 14a of the tobacco act had not been made operative in bihar. reliance has been placed upon the absence of a non-obstante clause in the tobacco act and the presence of section 31 in that act which, according to the respondents, makes it clear that the tobacco act was to be read as being in addition to and not in derogation of any other law. therefore according to the respondents, even if tobacco were solely within the exclusive field of legislation by parliament, the state legislature could recover fees for services rendered in respect of markets where tobacco may be sold.14. to being with, i do not think that this bench should at all go into the question of the validity of the tobacco board act, 1975 (referred to briefly hereafter as the 'tobacco act') even thought he issue was argued at some length by the main protagonists before us. the dispute which originally gave rise to this set of appeals is limited to the question whether the market committees have the authority to levy market fee under the markets act on the sale of tobacco and whether the provisions in the markets act granting market committees such right are repugnant to the provisions of the tobacco act and are therefore, unconstitutional. what has been placed before this bench for its consideration is the correctness of the earlier decision in itc ltd and ors. v. state of karnataka manu/sc/0007/1985manu/sc/0007/1985. the question raised in that case was whether the provision of the karnataka agricultural produce marketing (regulation) act, 1966 relating to the levy of market fee on tobacco were repugnant to the tobacco act. the majority held that it was. the minority view was that both acts could co-exist. but the validity of the tobacco act itself was never in dispute.15. no doubt, the states have been given notice but the focus of the arguments has been on the levy of fees on the marketing of tobacco. as the tobacco act covers a much larger field, a pronouncement on the validity of all the provisions dealing with a variety of activities under the act would not be appropriate as it would perhaps pre-empt a decision on aspects other than the marketing of tobacco without hearing those who might be interested in the outcome of a decision on those provisions.16. the starting point in any controversy dealing with apparently conflicting legislative jurisdictions is to see whether the conflict can be fairly reconciled by reading the entries to which the legislations are referable, together and "by interpreting and, where necessary, modifying the language of the one by that of the other". it is only when such resolution is not possible that the courts should be called upon to decide the question of legislative competence. this principle has been stressed in a number of cases by the privy council, the federal court and more recently by this court. [see; the central provinces and berar sales of motor spirit & lubricants taxation act, 1938", 'governor-general in council v. province of madras' state of bombay v. f.n. balsara air 1951 sc 818, 822, accountant & secretarial services pvt. ltd. v. union of india manu/sc/0005/1988manu/sc/0005/1988 : air1988sc1708 fatechand v. state of maharashtra manu/sc/0041/1977manu/sc/0041/1977 : [1977]2scr828 calcutta gas company (proprietary) ltd v. state of west bengal manu/sc/0063/1962manu/sc/0063/1962 : air1962sc1044.17. similarly, when there is an apparent conflict between two statutes enacted in valid exercise of legislative powers under the concurrent list, reconciliation must be attempted. only when the differences are irreconcilable should the courts resort to striking down a piece of legislation. [see: the kunnan devan hills produce v. the state of kerala manu/sc/0543/1972manu/sc/0543/1972 : [1973]1scr356 m/s. hoechst pharmaceuticals ltd. v. state of bihar manu/sc/0392/1983manu/sc/0392/1983 : [1985]154itr64(sc) ] .18. in my view, if therefore, the issue raised in this case can be resolved by limiting our consideration to the question of conflict, if any, between the two entries in the seventh schedule of the constitution to which the tobacco act and the market act are respectively relatable and between the provisions of the two statutes which have a bearing on the marketing of tobacco, it is unnecessary to stray into those areas which may not be necessary for the disposal of these appeals. the discussion in this opinion is therefore limited to the scope of the two entries and the allegedly conflicting provisions of the two acts with which we are concerned.19. the controversy in this case to a large extent turns on the meaning of the words "industry" as used in the three legislative lists. now the power to legislate in respect of all industries has been given under entry 24 of list ii to the state legislatures subject to entries 7 and 52 of list i. entries 7 and 52 of list i allow parliament to legislate in respect of particular 'industries' - namely such industries which are declared by parliament by law to be necessary for the defence or for the prosecution of war (entry 7) and industries the control of which by the union is declared by parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest (entry 52). trade and commerce in, and the production supply and distribution of the products of such controlled industry have been provided for in entry 33 of the concurrent list wherein both parliament and the state legislatures are competent to legislate. a constitution bench of this court in the calcutta gas company (prop.) ltd. v. the state of west bengal has held that the expression 'industry' in all the three lists must be given the same meaning and that since ordinarily industry is in the field of state legislation the word must be construed in the context of the other entries in list ii in such a manner so that no entry in list ii is deprived of its content. in other words, the meaning of the word 'industry' is to be determined with reference to entry 24 of list ii where the power to legislate generally in respect of industries has been provided. entries 7 and 52 are entries which specify particular industries out of this general pool. the meaning of the word 'industry' in these two entries, therefore, must necessarily be derived from the meaning which may be ascribed to the word in entry 24 of list ii.20. the seminal decision on this process of interpretation for arriving at the definition of industry' is ch. tika ramji and ors. v. state of uttar pradesh and ors. in which a constitution bench unanimously held."industry in the wide sense of the term would be capable of comprising three different aspects: (1) raw materials which are an integral part of the industrial process, (2) the process of manufacture or production, and (3) and distribution of the products of the industry. the raw materials would be goods which would be comprised in entry 26 of list ii. the process of manufacture or production would be comprised in entry 24 of list ii except where the industry was a controlled industry when it would fall within entry 52 of list i and the products of the industry would also be comprised in entry 27 of list ii except where they were the products of the controlled industries when they would fall within entry 33 of list iii."21. the underlying rationale of tika ramji's definition of the word 'industry' is that the constitution having expressly provided for particular fields of legislation in the three lists, each field must be given a meaning. entry 24 of list ii cannot be read so as to subsume within itself the other entries in list ii. it must be given a meaning which allows the other entries to survive and be defined to that extent with reference to what it is not.22. thus in calcutta gas it was held that the word 'industry' in entry 24 of list ii and 7 and 52 of list i did not include gas and gas works which was in terms provided for in entry 25. the argument in that case was that the state was incompetent to enact the oriental gas company act, 1960. under entry 25 of list ii because parliament had passed the industries (development & regulation) act, 1951 by virtue of entry 52 of list i. the central act in that case had under section 2 declared that it was expedient in the public interest that the union should take under its control inter-alia industries of "'fuel gas' (coal gas, natural gas and the like)". for the purpose of promoting and regulating these industries, the central act enabled the central government to investigate into the affairs of an undertaking to regulate its production, supply and distribution, and, if necessary to take over the management of the undertaking. the court said that if the word 'industry' in entry 24 of list ii and, therefore, 52 of list i were interpreted to include 'gas and gas works' which were expressly covered by entry 25 list ii, entry 25 may become redundant and it would amount to attributing to the authors of the constitution "ineptitude, want of precision and tautology". as a result, the challenge to the state act was negatived and the central act, insofar as it purported to deal with the gas industry, was held to be beyond the legislative competence of parliament.23. again in b. viswanathiah and company and ors. v. state of karnataka manu/sc/0602/1991manu/sc/0602/1991 : [1991]1scr305, writ petitions were filed challenging the validity of the provisions of the mysore silkworm seed and cocoon (regulation of production, supply and distribution) act, 1959 (act 5 of 1960). it was contended that the impugned provisions lacked legislative competence after the enactment by parliament of the central silk boards act (act 61 of 1948) which contained a declaration as contemplated under entry 52 of list i. the court held, following tika ramji, that the "control of the industry vested in parliament was only restricted tot he aspect of production and manufacture of silk yarn or silk. it did not obviously take in the earlier stages of the industry, namely, the supply of raw materials".it was also held:"though the production and manufacture of raw silk cannot be legislated upon by the state legislature in view of the provisions of the central act and the declaration in section 2 thereof, that declaration and entry 52 does not in any way limit the powers of the state legislature to legislate in respect of the goods produced by the silk industry. to interpret entry 52 otherwise would render entry 33 in list iii of the seventh schedule to the constitution otiose-and meaningless".24. this process of defining 'industry' in entry 24 of list ii and consequently entry 52 of list i, by eliminating from its scope the fields specifically provided for in list ii or list iii has been consistently followed. for example in state of a.p. v. mcdowell and co manu/sc/0427/1996manu/sc/0427/1996 : [1996]3scr721 it was said:"parliament cannot take over the control of industries engaged in the production and manufacture of intoxicating liquors by making a declaration under entry 52 of list i, since the said entry governs only entry 24 in list ii but not entry 8 in list ii."25. in kanan devan hill produce v. state of kerala manu/sc/0543/1972manu/sc/0543/1972 : [1973]1scr356 it was held that a declaration under entry 52 of the union list in respect of the tea industry did not debar the states from legislating to acquire land under tea cultivation under entry 18 of list ii and entry 42 of list iii.26. a constitution bench in ganga sugar corporation ltd. v. state of uttar pradesh and ors. manu/sc/0397/1979manu/sc/0397/1979 : [1980]1scr769 upheld the power of states to impose purchase tax on sugarcane under item 54 in the state list despite central legislation under entry 52 of list i in respect of the sugar industry.27. another constitution bench in fatech chand v. state of maharashtra manu/sc/0041/1977manu/sc/0041/1977 : [1977]2scr828 had to decide the constitutional tug-of-war between the maharashtra debt relief act, 1976 on the one hand and the gold control act on the other. it was contended that the debt act was void insofar as it dealt with "gold loans" because parliament had occupied the field under entry 52 of list i. it was also urged that there was inconsistency between the debt act and the gold control a. (sic) debt act could not be given effect to the extent of such (sic). the court noted that the debt act came squarely within entry 33 of list ii namely "money-lending and money-lenders; relief of agricultural indebtedness" and it was held that despite the fact that the gold act was referable to entry 52 of list i:".....this does not mean that other entries in the state list become impotent even regarding 'gold'. the state legislature can make laws regarding money-lending even where gold is involved under entry 30, list ii, even as it loan regulate 'gambling in gold' under entry 34, impose sales tax on gold sales under entry 54 regulate by municipal laws under entry 5 and by trade restrictions under entry 26, the type of buildings for gold ships and the kind of receipts for purchase or sale of precious metal. to multiply instances is easy, but the core of the matter is that where under its power parliament has made a law which overrides an entry in the state list, that area is abstracted from the state list. nothing more."28. it is unnecessary to multiply instances of the numerous decisions which have followed the logic of tika ramji and accepted its conclusion that for the purposes of entry 24 of list ii and consequently entry 52 of list i, 'industry' means "manufacture or production" and nothing more. it is sufficient to note that tika ramji's definition of industry has been affirmed and applied recently by a constitution bench in belsund sugar company v. state of bihar (supra) and is still good law. harak chand banthia's case does not strike a discordant note.29. harakchand ratanchand banthia and ors. v. union of india manu/sc/0038/1969manu/sc/0038/1969 : [1970]1scr479, has been cited by the appellants in support of the proposition that the negative test laid down in tika ramji and developed in calcutta gas does not apply to define the scope of entry 52 of list i vis--vis entry 27 of list ii. the submission is unacceptable. in banthia's case the constitutional validity of the gold (control) act, 1968 enacted by parliament was questioned. gold had been declared to be a 'controlled' industry under entry 52 of list i by the industries (development & regulation) act, 1951. one of the challenges raised was that the activity sought to be controlled by the gold act, was not an industry and did not come within the preview of parliament under entry 52 of list i. the passage particularly relied upon by the appellants is quoted:"the question to be considered is what is the meaning of the word "industry" in entry 52 of list i, entry 24 of list ii and entry 33 of list iii. whatever may be its connotation it must bear the same meaning in all these entries which are so interconnected that conflicting or different meanings given to them would snap the connection. in the shorter oxford english dictionary the word "industry" is defined as "a particular branch of productive labour; a trade or manufacture." according to webster's third new international dictionary (1961 edn.) the word "industry" means "(a) systematic labour especially for the creation of value; (b) a department or branch of a craft, art, business or manufacture, a division of productive and profit making labour especially one that employs a large personnel and capital especially in manufacturing; (c) a group of productive or profit making enterprises or organisations that have a similar technological structure of production and that produce or supply technically substitutable goods, services or sources of income." it was said that if the word "industries" is construed in this wide sense, entry 27 of list ii will lose all meaning and content. it is not possible to accept this contention for, entry 27 is a general power should not be so interpreted as to nullify a particular power conferred by the same instrument. in tika ramji v. state of uttar pradesh 1956 scr 393 the expression "industry" as defined to mean the process of manufacture or production and did not include raw materials used in the industry or the distribution of the products of the industry. it was contended that the word "industry" was a word of wide import and should be construed as including not only the process of manufacture or production but also activities antecedent thereto such as acquisition of raw materials and subsequent thereto such as disposal of the finished products of that industry. but this contention was not accepted. it was contended by mr. daphtary that if the process of production was to constitute "industry" a process of machinery or mechanical contrivance was essential. but we see no reason why such a limitation should be imposed on the meaning of the word "industry" in the legislative lists. similarly it was argued by mr. paalkhivala that the manufacture of gold ornaments was not an industry because it required application of individual art and craftsmanship and aesthetic skill. but mere use of skill or art is not a decisive factor and will not take the manufacture of gold ornaments out of the ambit of the relevant legislative entries. it is well settled that the entries in the three lists are only legislative heads or fields of legislation and they demarcate the area over which the appropriate legislature can operate. the legislative entries must be given a large and liberal interpretation, the reason being that the allocation of subjects to the lists is not by way of scientific or logical definition but is a mere enumeration of broad and comprehensive categories. it is not, however, necessary for the purpose of this case to attempt to define the expression "industry" precisely or to state exhaustively all its different aspects. but we are satisfied in the present case that the manufacture of gold ornaments by goldsmiths in india is a "process of systematic production" for trade or manufacture and so falls within the connotation of the word "industry" in the appropriate legislative entries. it follows, therefore that in enacting the impugned act parliament was validly exercising its legislative power in respect of matters covered by entry 52 of list i and entry 33 of list iii."(emphasis mine)30. the decision cannot be read as whittling down or deviating from the reasoning or the definition of the word industry in tika ramji. it does not sack to do so. indeed the court re-affirmed the definition of industry in tika ramji. the observation relating to entry 27 of list ii must be understood in relation to the language of the entry which reads:"production, supply and distribution of goods subject to the provisions of entry 33 of list iii."31. this provides for states to generally legislate on production, supply and distribution of goods. entry 33 of list iii deals particularly with the production, supply and distribution of the products of industries where the control of such industry by the union is declared by law to be expedient in the public interest under entries 7 or 52 of list i. it would not have been necessary to have especially provided for trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of the products of a controlled industry in entry 33 of list iii, had the word 'industry' in entries 7 and 52 of list i covered the fields. similarly had the word 'industry' in entry 24 of list ii been sufficient, why have a separate head under entry 27 of the same list dealing with the production supply and distribution of goods unless we concede that the framers of the constitution were guilty of ineptitude, want of precision and tautology? the concept of a 'general' and 'particular' term is necessarily relative depending upon the context in which the term is considered. entry 27 of list ii is certainly a generally entry but only in relation to entry 33 of list iii which deals with trade, commerce etc. in particular kinds of products namely the products of a controlled industry. finally, it is clear from the passage quoted, that banthia held that the gold act was legislatively competent under entry 52 of list i because it dealt with the process of manufacture or production of gold i.e., it was within the sweep of industry as defined in tika ramji.32. the appellants submission that tika ramji narrowly construed the word because the decision was rendered in the context of the industrial (development & regulation) act, 1951 proceeds on a miss-appreciation of the decision. merely because tika ramji found that the particular central enactment under consideration was under entry 33 of list iii and not entry 52 of list i does not limit or detract from its authoritative pronouncement on the scope of entry 52 of list i. the finding in fact formed the basis of the conclusion that the provisions of the central act in question did not fall within entry 52 of list i. what was construed was the ambit of entry 52 of list i and the range of a declaration under that entry. that the declaration was contained in the industries (development and regulation) act, 1951 was inconsequential and could into colour the scope of the entry itself. it is significant that banthia's case, which according to the appellants accepted a wider meaning of 'industry', was also a case in which the relevant declaration under entry 52 of list i was under the industries. (development and regulation) act.33. banthia's case has been considered and explained in the subsequent decision of the constitution bench in m/s fatchand himmatlal and ors. v. state of maharashtra manu/sc/0041/1977manu/sc/0041/1977 : [1977]2scr828. with specific reference to banthia's case, the court held:"...we see nothing in that decision which contradicts the position that while the gold control act fell within entry 52 of list i the state list was not totally suspended for that reason for purposes of legislating on subjects which fell within that list, but incidentally referred also to gold transactions."34. to add to the persuasive force of their arguments, the appellants then put forward what can only be described an argument of alarm. it was contended that if a narrow view of industry were taken, then despite a declaration by parliament under entry 7 of list i that an industry was necessary for the purpose of defence of the country or for the prosecution of war, parliament would not be competent to legislate on the supply of raw materials or distribution of the finished product. such an argument is hardly relevant to a question of construction. in any case it overlooks the superior powers of parliament under entry 33 of list iii and the overriding powers of parliament during a national emergency including those under articles 249 250 251 and 252.35. to sum up: the word 'industry' for the purposes of entry 52 of list i has been firmly confined by tika ramji to the process of manufacture or production only. subsequent decisions including those of other constitution benches have re-affirmed that tika ramji's case authoritatively defined the word 'industry' - to mean the process of manufacture or production and that it does not include the raw materials used in the industry or the distribution of the products of the industry. given the constitutional framework, and the weight of judicial authority it is not possible to accept an argument canvassing a wider meaning of the word 'industry'. whatever the word may mean in any other context, it must be understood in the constitutional context as meaning 'manufacture or production'.36. applying the negative test as evolved in tika ramji in this case it would follow that the word 'industry' in entry 24 of list ii and consequently entry 52 of list i does not and cannot be read to include entries 28 and 66 of list ii which have been expressly marked out as fields within the state's exclusive legislative powers. as noted earlier entry 28 deals with markets and fairs and entry 66 with the right to levy fees in respect of, in the present context, markets and fairs. entry 52 of list i does not override entry 28 in list ii no has entry 28 in list ii been made subject to entry 52 unlike entry 24 of list ii. this court in belsund sugar (supra) has also accepted the argument that entry 28 of list ii operated in its own and cannot be affected by any legislation pertaining to industry as found in entry 52 of list i.37. if 'industry' does not include 'markets and fairs' it is important to define what markets and fairs connote. 'market' may strictly be defined as "the meeting or congregating together of people for the purchase and sale of provisions or livestock, publicly exposed, at a fixed time and place". a 'fair' has been judicially defined as meaning 'a periodical concourse of buyers and sellers in a place generally for sale and purchase ..... at times or on occasion ordained by custom. the distinction between markets and fairs appears to lie in the periodicity viz. while a market may be a regular or permanent place of business, a fair is an intermittent one. at common law, fairs and markets were also franchises or rights to hold a concourse of buyers and sellers to dispose of the commodities in respect of which the franchise is given. this included the right to levy a toll or sum payable by the buyer upon sales of articles in a market. the sense in which the words has been used in entry 28 appears to cover not only such right but the market place itself including the concourse of buyers and sellers' and the regulation of all these.38. the word "markets" has also found place in entry 48 of list 1 which reads "stock exchanges and future markets". a constitution bench of this court in waverly jute mills co. ltd. -v. raymon & co. (india) private ltd. manu/sc/0004/1962manu/sc/0004/1962 : [1963]3scr209 : [1963]3scr209 rejected the submission that the word "markets" must be restricted to " a place set apart for the meeting of the general public of buyers and sellers, freely open to nay such to assemble together, where any seller any expose his goods for sale and any buyer may purchase".it was held that:"market no doubt ordinarily means a place where business is being transacted. that was probably all that it meant at a time when trade was not developed and when transactions took place at specified places. but with the development of commerce bargains came to be concluded more often that not through correspondence and the connotation of the work 'market' underwent a corresponding expansion. in modern parlance the work 'market' has come to mean business as well as the place where business is carried on."39. the question then is does the markets act fall within this definition of the word 'markets? the establishment of regulated markets had long been recognized as an imperative requirement of any ordered plan of agricultural development in this country. the objects and reasons for enacting the bihar markets act, 1960 has been stated as: properly organising markets of agricultural and allied commodities to ensure that the agriculturist gets a fair share of the price paid by the consumer for his produce by attempting to do away or rigidly controlling the middle man. what was originally a source of private profit in common law, has by virtue of the markets act become a matter of municipal concern namely, setting up of regulated markets for the marketing of agricultural produce.40. the provisions of the markets act are briefly noted. the markets act provides for he issuance of a notification under section 3 by the state government declaring its intention of regulating the purchase, sale, storage, processing of specified produce in that area. "agricultural produce" has been defined in section 2 (6) as:" all produce whether processed or non-processed, manufactured or not, of agriculture, horticulture, plantation, animal husbandry, forest, sericulture, pisciculture, and includes live stocks or poultry as specified in the schedule."41. tobacco has been mentioned at item xi in the schedule. under section 4 the state government declares the area specified as a market area for the purpose of the markets act. from the date of the declaration, under section 4 no person or authority can establish or continue or be allowed to set up any place for the purchase sale stores or processing of any notified agricultural produce except in accordance with the provisions of the markets act. under section 5 the state government may declare by notification any building or locality in any market area to be the principal market yard. sections 6 to 15 and 17 to 27-a deal with the setting up of market committees, their constitution and functions. these market committees are subject to the superintendence and control of the bihar, agricultural marketing board set up under section 33a of the markets act.42. section 15 prohibits notified agricultural produce from being bought or sold by any person at any place in the market area other than the relevant principal market yard or sub-market yard or yards established therein unless it is for retail sale, personal consumption or exempted by the marketing board under section 15(1) or (2). the mode of purchase and sale specified under section 15(20 is by means of open auction or tender system. sub-section (2) of section 18 specifically authorise the market committee to issue licences to persons engaged in the processing, storage or processing of agricultural produce to operate in the market area and also to control and regulate the admission of persons into the market yard or the sub-market yards and to prosecute persons trading without a valid licence. section 27 empowers the market committee to levy and collect market fee from the buyer on the agricultural produce bought or sold in the market area at specified rates. the remaining sections of the markets act omitted from consideration as they are not at all relevant. we are really concerned with section 15 and more particularly sections 27. the setting up of markets areas, markets yards and regulating use of the facilities within such area or yards by levy of market fee is a matter of local interest and would be covered by entry 28 of list ii and thus within the legislative competence of the state. if any portion of the market area or the market yards is used of the sale or purchase of tobacco, that too will be within the state's competence. to hold to the contrary would be to ignore the exclusive powers of the states to legislate in respect of markets and fairs under entries 28 and 66 of list ii. the markets act does not seek to regulate either the "manufacture or production" of tobacco (assuming that agricultural produce can be manufactured) and thus does not impinge upon the tobacco act in so far as it is at all relatable to entry 52 of list i. all the provisions of the markets act, in my views, are clearly relatable to entry 28 of list ii given the scope of the entry as discussed earlier. the state in the circumstances, was not incompetent to incidentally also legislate with regard to tobacco and " the semantic sweep of entry 52 did not come in the way of the state legislature making laws on subjects within its sphere and not directly going to the heart of the industry itself". in my opinion therefore sections 15 and 27 of the markets act in pith and substance are relatable to entries 28 and 66 of list ii and have been competently enacted by the state. incidentally it is nobody's case that the fee charged under section 27 does not represent a quid pro quo for the services rendered and facilities afforded in the market area. it follows that parliament is incompetent to legislate for the setting up or regulation of 'markets and fairs' within the meaning of the phrase in entry 28 of list ii, even in respect of tobacco. it may of course incidentally trespass into the state legislative field, provided (1) the trespass is an inseparable apart of the provisions validly passed and (2) the state has not already fully occupied its field with conflicting statutory provisions.43. let us consider the scope of the tobacco act. the statement of objects and reasons of the tobacco act shows that the enactment was necessary in view of the fact that india is the third largest producer of tobacco in the world, the sixth largest among the tobacco exporting countries and the second largest exporter of virginia tobacco. the manifest intention of parliament was to take measures to ensure that the tobacco particularly virginia tobacco met the demands of the markets in india and abroad both qualitatively and quantitatively. the act which extends to the whole of india has however not been brought entirely into force in all the states. chapter i contains the fist three sections. section 1, sub-section (3) provides for the act coming into fore on such dates as the central government may, by notification in the official gazette, appoint; provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions for the act and for different states or different parts thereof. section 2 contains the necessary declaration in terms of entry 52 list i in relation to the tobacco industry.44. chapter ii of the act consists of sections 4 to 8 and deals with the establishment and functions of the tobacco board. section 8 (1) casts a duty on the board to promote the development of the tobacco industry. sub-section (2) prescribes some specific measures which may be taken by the board. those which are of relevance are noted:"8(2) (a).....(b) keeping a constant watch on the virginia tobacco market both in india and abroad, and ensuring that the growers get a fair and remunerative price for the same and that these are no wide fluctuations in the prices of the commodity;(c) maintenance and improvement of existing markets, and development of new markets outside india for indian virginia tobacco and its products and devising of marketing strategy in consonance with demand for the commodity outside india, including group marketing under limited brand names;(cc) establishment by the board of auction platform with the previous approval of the central government for the sale of virginia tobacco by registered grower or curers and functioning of the board as an auctioneer at auction platform established by or registered with it subject to such conditions as may be specified by the central government......(e) regulating in other respects virginia tobacco marketing in india and export of virginia tobacco having due regard to the interests of growers, manufacturers and dealers and the nation;(g) purchasing virginia tobacco from growers when the same is considered necessary or expedient for protecting the interests of the growers and disposal of the same in indian or abroad as and when considered appropriate;.....45. sections 10 to 15 are in chapter iii which deals with regulation of production and disposal of tobacco, for registration/licensing not only of the growers including nursery growers (section 10 10-a) but also curers (section 11), processors and manufactures (section 11-a), graders and stores ( 11-b), and exporters, dealers, packers or auctioneers (section 12).46. of particular relevance are sections 13 and 13a which provide for virginia tobacco to be sold at registered auction platforms or auction platforms established by the board, and places a duty on registered dealers and exporters to purchase tobacco only at such auction platforms. however, in those stated in which section 13 is not in force, under section 13b dealers purchasing virginia tobacco must pay the full price for the whole quantity and are restricted from taking recourse to any such practice which may be specified as unfair by the board.47. section 14 deals with the forms for registration and section 15 with the power of inspection t ascertain whether the particulars in the forms are correct. apart from these sections, according to the appellants, section 14-a in particular occupies the field with respect to levy of fees on the sale of tobacco. it reads:"14-a(1) where virginia tobacco is sold at nay auction platform established by the board under this act, it shall be competent for the board or for any officer of the board authorised by it in this behalf to levy fees, for the services rendered by the board in relation to such sale, at such rate not exceeding two percent of the value of such tobacco as the central government may form time to time, by notification in the official gazette, specify;(2) the fees levied under sub-section (1) shall be collected by the board or such officer equally from the seller of the virginia tobacco and the purchaser of such tobacco, in such manner as may be prescribed."48. the contents of chapter iv and v of the act need not detain us as they deal with aspects far removed from the markets act. of the last chapter viz. chapter vi, two sections are noteworthy viz. section 30(1) which allows the central government to suspend provisions of the act in respect of certain territories and section 31 which reads:31.the provisions of this act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, and not in derogation of, the provisions of nay other law for the time being in force."49. the object of the tobacco act is to keep a control on the quality and quantity of tobacco grown in the country with an eye on the international markets. the location of domestic markets for sale of tobacco can hardly be described as a necessary concomitant to the achievement of this object. assuming it is, fairly read, it is possible to reconcile the allegedly conflicting provisions of the two statutes by a reasonable and practical construction of their provisions. the use of the word "markets" and marketing in the tobacco act, including section 8 does not mean a market in the sense the word has been used in the markets act. it is obvious from phrases such as 'the virginia tobacco market', 'development of new markets outside india' etc. that the word has been used in the sense of 'sale as controlled by supply and demand; especially a demand for a commodity or service" - in this case tobacco. the tobacco act is not concerned so much with the 'where' but with the 'how', the tobacco is disposed of. even when the tobacco act speaks of setting up of auction platforms it does not indeed it could not say where the auction platforms are to be set up.50. since state are exclusively competent to decide on the location of markets, the authorities under the tobacco act would have to comply with the municipal laws and set up the auction platforms only within the permissible areas. if the facilities afforded under the market act are utilised, the facilities will have to be paid for and the authorises appointed to levy and collect fees for the purpose under the markets act would be competent to do so. if further facilities are offered at the auction platforms under the tobacco act, fees may be levies under section 14-a of that act. the right to levy fees under the two acts therefore may not necessarily conflict, the levy not being in the alternative but additional. assuming this is not possible and there is any conflict, the provisions of the markets act and not the tobacco act would prevail.51. even if sections 15 and 27 of the markets act are not referable to entries 28 and 66 of list ii and are referable to entries 26 and 27 of list ii - nevertheless these sections of the markets act do not trespass on turf reserved by parliament under entry 52 of list i? state legislation on the supply and distribution of goods as well as trade and commerce therein which are relatable to entries 26 and 27, is only subject to the central enactment if any under entry 33 of the concurrent list and not entry 52 of list i. furthermore, whether or not any portion of the tobacco act relater to an "industry' within the meaning of entry 52 list i, following the logic of tika ramji at least those provisions relating to the disposal of tobacco are not so relatable. the declaration under entry 52 list i does not cover these provisions and the states were free to legislate under entries 26 27 of list ii on tobacco. i do not propose to decide whether the provisions of the tobacco act dealing with the sale of tobacco may be sustained with reference to entry 33 of list iii. it is an unnecessary exercise because the appellants did not argue this, and also because, as i have said earlier, the constitutional validity of the provisions of the tobacco act has not been referred to this bench for scrutiny.52. assuming that chapter iii of the tobacco act are covered by entry 52 of list i, nevertheless the parliament did not intend to invalidate nay portion of the markets act. it has consciously clarified by section 31 that it does not intend to occupy the entire field and has 'made space' for the state legislation and made it clear the provision of the central act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law. the section assumes greater significance since most of the markets acts were in pace when the tobacco act was enacted. there are two ways in which such a saving clause as is contained in section 31 of the tobacco act may be understood. there is the way which found favour with this court in m.karunanidhi v. union of india manu/sc/0159/1979manu/sc/0159/1979 : 1979crilj773 which held that such a section clearly evinced the intention of the dominant legislature leaving "no room for any argument that the state act was in any way repugnant to the central act". there is the other way of reading such a section in the dominant legislation as incorporating or taking under its legislative umbrella the allegedly conflicting provisions of the subservient statute. either way, the express words in section 31 couples with the duty of courts to reconcile and uphold legislation, if possible, can only result in upholding the constitutional validity of the market fee imposed by the state.53. a further compelling circumstance to uphold the levy of market fee is the fact that several provisions of chapter iii of the tobacco act particularly those dealing with the setting up of auction platforms namely sections 13 and 13a, and section 14a relating to the levy of fees on the sale of tobacco have not been brought into operation in any state in indian except for the state of karnataka. i have already stated the reasons why the provisions relating to sale of tobacco in the tobacco act do not come within the definition of 'industry' and are not covered by the declaration under entry 52 of list i. but granting or the sake of argument that the sale of tobacco comes within the definition of industry until the central government chooses to actually occupy the field by effective legislation, it would remain open for the state legislature to cover that field under entry 24 of list ii. it is difficult to adopt an interpretation which would debar the states from the right to provide for the sale of tobacco only within market areas and levy market fees although parliament does not now and may never seek to bring sections 13 13a and 14a into operation in those states. this view finds support in the pronouncement of a constitution bench in ishwari khetan sugar mills (p) ltd. v. state of uttar pradesh (supra) when it was construing the impact of a declaration under entry 52 of list i, it was said that legislation for assuming control containing the declaration under entry 52 of list i must spell out the limit of control so assumed by the declaration. therefore, the degree and extent of control that would be acquired by parliament pursuant to the declaration would necessarily depend upon the legislation enacted spelling out the degree of control assumed.54. in belsund sugar (supra), one of the controversies raised related to a conflict between the provisions of the markets act and the tea act, 1953. there too, the tea act envisaged that an order might be passed under section 30 relating to the sale and purchase f tea. the contention that the mere possibility of issuance of such a control order under section 30 of the tea act was sufficient to oust the state legislature from the field, was negatived in the following words:"...mere possibility of issuance of any future order under section 30(1) of the tea act by the central government in the absence of any existing express order to that effect, cannot be said to have occupied the field regarding purchase and sale of manufactured tea and fixation of maximum or minimum price thereof, or the location of such sales. these topics cannot be said to be legitimately convened by the tea act. hence, the field is wide open for the state legislature to exercise its concurrent legislative power under entry 33 of list iii for effectively dealing with these matters."55. therefore, even if none were to concede that there is a conflict between the provisions in the markets act prohibiting sale of tobacco otherwise than in a market area and the setting up of auction platforms under the tobacco act, and between the states power to levy market fee under the markets act and the levy of fee on the sale of tobacco under the tobacco act, at least in those states where sections 13 13a and 14a of the tobacco act are not operative, the provisions of the markets act must prevail.56. it now remains for me to answer the question which was referred to this bench, namely whether itc ltd. v. state of karnataka (supra) has been rightly decided. the majority opinion on the issued of legislative competence of the state legislature was delivered by fazal ali, j. in striking down that part of the karnataka markets act which provided for the power to levy market fee on tobacco and its products, the opinion was based on six premises, each of which do not appear to be in consonance with the law.57. first - the court proceeded on the basis that the tobacco act was wholly and solely relatable to entry 52 of list 1. i have already given may reasons for holding that the tobacco act in so far as it deals with the disposal of tobacco is not within entry 52 of list i.58. second - article 246(4) was relied on to hold that parliament had overriding power "to legislate in exceptional cases in matters appearing in the state list". article 246(4) has no manner of application to the present dispute. it reads:"(4) parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of indian not included in a state notwithstanding that such matter is a matter enumerated in the state list."59. the sub-article only deals with the power of parliament to make laws in respect of union territories even in respect of matters enumerated in the state list.60. third - it was held to be "well settled that where tow acts, once passed by the parliament and the other by state legislature collide and there was no question of harmonizing them, then the central legislation must prevail". what is well settled is that if the parliament and the state legislature enact conflicting legislation in respect of the same subject matter under an entry in the concurrent list then only will the central legislation prevail. in other cases it will be a question of whether the conflicting legislation is referable to an exclusive entry under the state list or the union list, after the determination of which, the dominant legislation will prevail.61. fourth - it was said that if the minority view (expressed by mukharji-j) were accepted, it would "amount to robbing the 1975 act of its entire content and essential import by handing over the power of legislation to the state government which per se has been taken over by the parliament under article 246 by the 1975 act". mukharji-j had in fact followed tika ramji and held correctly that the tobacco act and markets act operated in their respective fields and that there was no repugnancy if both the acts were considered in the light of their respective true nature and character. tika ramji and the other constitution bench decision following it were not even referred to by the majority.62. fifth - in determining the impact of entry 52 of list i vis a viz entry 28 of list ii, the majority relied on decisions dealing with entry 54 of list i, and entry 23 of list ii. the scope of the entries are different and i agree with the view expressed in the opinion of my learned brother pattanaik, j that the decisions relied upon by the majority viz the hingir rampur coal co. ltd. v. state of orissa; manu/sc/0037/1960manu/sc/0037/1960 : [1961]2scr537 , baijnath kedia v. state of bihar manu/sc/0352/1969manu/sc/0352/1969 : [1970]2scr100 bharat cooking coal ltd. v. state of bihar manu/sc/0742/1990manu/sc/0742/1990 : 1990 4 scc 557 and state of orissa v. m.a. tullock & co. manu/sc/0021/1963manu/sc/0021/1963 : [1964]4scr461 are inapposite.63 the final premise on which the majority based their view that the states could not levy any market fee on tobacco, was that since the assent of the president was not taken, the karnataka markets act 1980, was wholly incompetent. the view proceeds on a misinterpretation of article 254(2), which in any event has no application to this case. article 254(2) provides:"(2) where a law made by the legislature of a state with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the concurrent list contains any provision repugnant to the provisions of an earlier law made by parliament or an existing law with respect to that matter, then, the law so made by the legislature of such state shall, if it has been reserved for the consideration of the president and has received his assent, prevail in that state."64. the language is clear. it only deals with the question of supremacy and not competence. in respect of conflicting legislation under the concurrent list, if the state legislation has received the assent of the president, it will prevail over the central legislation in that state. the article does not provide that state legislation without the assent of the president is incompetent.65. in the circumstances i would hold that itc v. state of karnataka (supra) was wrongly decided and would for the reasons discussed uphold the competence of the state legislatures to levy market fee on tobacco.y.k. sabharwal, j.66. the issue in these matters is about the validity and applicability of bihar agricultural produce markets act, 1960 and the karnataka agricultural produce marketing (regulation) act, 1966, to the extent these state legislations deal with sale of tobacco in market areas with particular reference to the levy thereupon of market fee, after enactment of tobacco board act, 1975-a parliamentary legislation. the same is the issue in respect of similar state legislations passed by state legislatures of uttar pradesh and madhya pradesh. these issues were subject matter of decision in itc ltd. and ors. v. state of karnataka and ors. [1985 supp. scc 476].67. we are required to determine whether itc's case is correctly decided or not. that is a decision rendered by a three judge. bench. the majority decided in favour of itc. later a bench of two judge expressed tentative view that the decision in itc's case requires reconsideration. thus, these matters are before this bench.68. the arguments on behalf of the appellants contending that itc has been correctly decided have been led by mr. shanti bhushan followed and supported by other learned counsel appearing for union of india and the tobacco board. on behalf of the state of bihar and other parties contending the itc has not been correctly decided, the arguments were led by mr r.k. dwivedi followed and supported by other learned counsel appearing for other states and market committees.69. the answer to the question--whether itc is correctly decided or not depends upon the scope of entry 52 in union list of the seventh schedule of the constitution of india with particular reference to the meaning of the expression 'industries' in the said entry as also in entry 24 of the state list of the seventh schedule of the constitution.70 in itc's case the majority held that the provisions of the karnataka agricultural produce marketing (regulation) act, 1966 are repugnant to the parliamentary legislation, the tobacco board act, 1975 and, therefore, tobacco is liable to be removed from the schedule of that enactment. expressing the minority view, sabyasachi mukharji, j held that the state legislation and the tobacco board act, 1975 can co-exist.71. the first question to be determined is can state legislation and tobacco board act co-exist in respect of sale of tobacco in the market areas within the framework of agricultural produce marketing acts - the state legislations under consideration? if our answer to this question is that the two legislations can co-exist, in that event it may not be necessary to go into the aspect of legislative competence. if, however, our answer is that the state legislations and the parliamentary legislation are incapable of reconciliation and the two cannot co-exist, in that case, the next question that would require determination will be about the validity of the state legislations.72. in the proposed judgment, hon'ble mr. justice pattanaik has come to the conclusion that the agricultural produce markets act and the tobacco board act are in direct collision with each other and cannot be allowed to be operated simultaneously.73. the state legislations and parliamentary legislations cannot co-exist is apparent from various provisions of the two legislations. to illustrate in this regard, reference may be made on one hand to section 4(2) of bihar act and similar provision in other state legislations and on the other to the provisions of section 13 of the tobacco board act in states wherein this section has been enforced and also to section 8(2)(cc). reference can also be made to rule 32 of the tobacco board rules, 1976 framed in exercise of powers conferred by section 32 of the tobacco board act regarding purchase of virginia tobacco in comparison to section 15 of bihar act requiring the agricultural produce, which tobacco is, to be brought to the market yard and sold by means of an auction or tender to the highest bidder. the power of the tobacco board to purchase from growers as provided in rule 32 cannot co-exist with sale by auction or tender. even in regard the price and manner of payment, licensing and auction procedure under two legislations and rules made thereunder show that they cannot co-exist. in this regard reference can also be made to the tobacco board (auction) rules, 1984 and tobacco board (auction) regulation, 1984. it is evident that the compliance with the provisions of one would involve non-compliance of the provisions of the other. the provisions of the two legislations have been referred to in the judgment of brother pattanaik, j. i am in respectful agreement with the opinion of justice pattanaik that the two cannot operate and co-exist simultaneously. in this view, the question about the legislative competence of the state legislatures will have to be examined.74. in itc's case , two learned judge have held the state legislation to be invalid. the power of state legislature per se to legislate in respect of sale of tobacco in market areas and levy of market fee, in view of article 246(3) read with entries 14, 28 and 66 of the state list, is not in dispute. the dispute has, however, arisen as according to itc, on declaration as contemplated by entry 52 of the union list having been made by the parliament in section 2 of the tobacco board act, 1975, and as a result of various provisions in that act, the field of sale of tobacco which is said to be integral part of tobacco industry has been transferred from entry 24 of the state list to entry 52 of the union list -- entry 24 being subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of the union list. the contention is that in this view, the state legislature is deprived of competence to legislate in the field of sale of tobacco in market area and levy market fee. under these circumstances, the competence of the state legislature to legislate in regard to sale of tobacco would depend upon the answer to the question whether under entry 52 of the union list, the parliament is competent or not to legislate in respect of sale of raw tobacco. if the answer to the question is that the parliament is competent, in that eventually, the state legislation will have to be invalidated for want of legislative competence. the answer to the question would, however, depend upon the scope of the expression 'industries' as deployed in entry 52 of the union list and entry 24 of the state list. if we find that the expression ' industries' is wide enough to include the raw material of the industry and the parliament is, thus competent to enact law under entry 52 of the union list, in respect of raw material, the parliament having supremacy as provided in article 246(1), the parliamentary legislation, namely, the tobacco board act would hold the field and the state legislation invalidated. the dispute in this case is not about parliamentary supremacy as none has doubted it in view of article 246(1) of the constitution but is whether parliament has competence at all to legislate in respect of raw tobacco or it falls within the competence of state. if we hold that while legislating in the field of industry as provided in entry 52 of the union list, the parliament is not competent to legislate in respect of the field anterior to industry, i.e. its raw material and can legislate only in respect of the process of manufacture or production, in that eventuality, the state legislation will have to be held to be constitutional, intra vires and applicable.75. in the proposed judgment, justice pattanaik has held that the word 'industry' in entry 52 of the union list cannot be given restricted meaning so as to exclude from its purview the subject of legislation coming within entry 27 or entry 14 of list ii and thus, the parliamentary legislation, namely, the tobacco board act, 1975 is constitutionally valid and consequently, the state legislations entitling the market committee to levy fee for sale and purchase of raw tobacco within the market area will not be operative so far as the produce of tobacco is concerned and that the majority judgment in the itc's case is correctly decided. i express my respectful dissent with the view expressed by justice pattanaik on this aspect and thus this separate judgment.76. the parliament and assemblies draw power to legislate from the provisions of the constitution of india. we are concerned here with article 246. article 246(1) of the constitution provides that notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3), parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list 1 in the seventh schedule. the said list is referred to in the constitution as the 'union list'.77. entry 52 in the union list is industries, the control of which by the union is declared by parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest'. in respect of field covered by this entry, the parliament has enacted the tobacco board act, 1975. section 2 of the tobacco board act contains the declaration that it is expedient in the public interest that the union should take under its control the tobacco industry.78. article 246(2) provides that notwithstanding anything in clause (3), parliament and, subject to clause (1), the legislature of any state also, have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list iii in the seventh schedule. the said list is referred to in the constitution as the "concurrent list".79. article 246(3) provides that subject to clauses (1) and (2), the legislature of any state has exclusive power to make laws for such state or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list ii in the seventh schedule. the said list is referred to in the constitution as the "state list".80 in exercise of power under article 246(3), various state legislature have enacted agricultural produce marketing acts for regulating sale and purchase of the agricultural produce and levying market fee within the framework of those acts which, inter alia, permit levy and collection of market fee. the tobacco under the acts in question has been notified as an agricultural produce.81. in itc's case , by majority, it was held that the tobacco industry having been taken over by the central government under entry 52 of the union list by enactment of tobacco board act, the state legislature ceases to have any jurisdiction to legislate for that filed and therefore, the provisions of the karnataka agricultural produce and marketing act entitling the market committee to levy market fee in respect of sale and purchase of tobacco within the market area collide with tobacco board act. thus, the state act so far as it relates to tobacco was struck down. the minority view was that both the state and the central act can operate in their respective fields and there is no repugnancy if both the acts are considered in the light of their respective true nature and character.82. the majority judgment in itc's case for the view that it took principally relied upon the two constitution bench decisions of this court in state of orissa v. m.a. tulloch and co. (1962) 4 scr 461 and baijnath kadio v. state of bihar and ors. manu/sc/0352/1969manu/sc/0352/1969 : [1970]2scr100. referring to these two decisions, the opinion expressed was that these cases are direct authority on the question at issue, viz., if the central act and the state act collide, the inevitable consequence would have to be that the central act will prevail over the state act and later will have to yield and that the provisions of the karnataka agricultural produce marketing (regulation) act, 1966 are repugnant to the tobacco board act, 1975 and, therefore, tobacco is liable to be removed from the schedule of the said act.83. the minority view, however, was that there is nothing in the state act or in the rules which indicate that it is inconsistent with or cannot be operated along with the marketing regulations and both the acts can operate in their respective fields and there is no repugnancy if both the acts are considered in the light of their true nature and character.84. in itc's case the challenge was to the constitutional validity of the karnataka agricultural produce marketing (regulation) (amendment) act, 1980. by the amending act, tobacco was enumerated as an agricultural produce for the purposes of the karnataka agricultural produce marketing (regulation) act, 1966. the high court was of the view that the tobacco board act did not cover the marketing o tobacco in its entirety but only covered a part of the area of the topic of marketing of tobacco and that the two legislations, namely, the tobacco board act, 1975 and the karnataka agricultural produce marketing (regulation) act, can co-exist and operate cumulatively. the further view expressed by the high court was that any intention of the superior legislature to cover the whole field to make a comprehensive law with regard to marketing of tobacco was not manifest in the legislation.85. the contention canvassed before this court in itc's case was that in view of the central act, the state legislature was not competent to bring into fold of the state act, the tobacco, the matter being covered by entry 52 of the union list of seventh schedule of the constitution of india. the precise question in itc's case was as to whether in respect of marketing of tobacco, the state government was entitled to legislate or whether in view of the fact that there was a declaration under entry 52 of the union list, the state legislature had no competence to legislate on tobacco and as such the impugned legislation was ultra vires.86. in the minority opinion, mukharji, j. noticed that the karnataka agricultural produce marketing (regulation) act, 1966 deals with the subject of market in entry 28 read with entry 66 of list ii and that it had to be borne in mind that entry 28 is not subject to withdrawal to list i by parliament. the state act is not on a subject in list iii nor is the central act a law relating to any subject in list iii. it was concluded that, therefore, there cannot be any question of repugnancy. the nature and character of the acts, namely, karnataka agricultural produce marketing (regulation) act, 1966 and the central act was noticed and it was held that it is fully manifest that both the acts can operate in their respective fields. further in the minority opinion it was observed that while giving due weight to center's supremacy in the matter of legislation, the states' legitimate sphere of legislation should not be unnecessarily whittled down because that would be unwarranted by the spirit and basic purpose of the constitutional division of powers-not merely allocation of power by the constitution but invasion by parliamentary legislations. while it is true that in the spheres very carefully delineated the parliament has supremacy over state legislatures, supremacy in the sense that in those fields, parliamentary legislation would hold the field and not the state legislation -but to denude the state legislature of its power to legislate where the legislation in question in pith and substance i.e. in its true nature and character, belongs to the state field, one should be chary to denude the state of its powers to legislate and mobilize resources - because that would be destructive of the spirit and purpose of india being a union of states. states must have power to raise and mobilize resources in their exclusive fields. the marketing act is essentially an act to regulate the marketing of agricultural produce. justice mukharji said that "it must, therefore, be held that the state act should prevail. one should avoid corroding the state's ambit of powers of legislation which will ultimately lead to erosion of india being a union of state.".87. the majority opinion was expressed by justice s. murtaza fazal ali with whom justice a. varadarajan concurred. in the majority opinion after noticing the crucial point for determination i.e. whether the karnataka state had any jurisdiction to encroach upon the limits of entry 52 of the union list, relying inter ali upon the decisions in the cases of tulloch, baijnath kadio , it was concluded that once the center takes over an industry under entry 52 of list i of the seventh schedule and passes an act to regulate the legislation, the state legislature ceases to have any jurisdiction to legislate in that field and if it does so, that legislation would be ultra vires the powers of the state legislature. it was further observed that acceptance of the minority opinion would rob the central act of its entire content and essential import by handing over he power of legislation to the state government which per se had been taken over by the parliament under article 246 by enacting the tobacco board act, 1975. in the majority opinion reliance was placed on the following passage of baijnath kadio's case as extracted at page 174 as under."it is open to parliament to declare that it is expedient in the public interest that the control should rest in central government. to what extent such a declaration can go is for parliament to determine and this must be commensurate with public interest. once this declaration is made and the extent laid down, the subject of legislation to the extent laid down becomes an exclusive subject for legislation by parliament. any legislation by the state after such declaration and trenching upon the field disclosed in the declaration must necessary be unconstitutional because that field is abstracted from the legislative competence of the state legislature. this proposition is also self-evident that no attempt was rightly made to contradict it."88. the majority opinion has not noticed the constitution bench's decision in the case of ch. tika ramji and ors. etc. v. the state of uttar pradesh and ors. manu/sc/0008/1956manu/sc/0008/1956 : [1956]1scr393 decisions on the scope o entry 52 but relying upon m.a. tulloch and baijnath kedio held that when declaration under entry 52 of list i in respect of public interest is made and the extent laid down the subject of legislation to the extent laid down becomes an exclusive subject of legislation by the parliament and any legislation by the state after such declaration trenching upon the field disclosed in the declaration must necessarily be unconstitutional because that field is abstracted from the legislative competence of the state legislature. thus it was held that the government of karnataka had no jurisdiction to levy and market fee on tobacco because the state act to that extent collides with the central act of 1975.89. the decision in the cases of baijnath kadio and tulloch have also been relied upon by mr. shanti bhushan. reliance has also been placed by learned counsel on the hingir-rampur coal co. ltd. and ors. v. state of orissa and ors. manu/sc/0037/1960manu/sc/0037/1960 : [1961]2scr537. it was contended by mr. shanti bhushan that in law and in principle there would be no difference in respect of a case dealing with the scope of entry 52 of the union list or a case dealing with the scope of entry 54 of that list. the submission of learned counsel is that for the purpose of interpretation both these entries have been equated by this court and reliance in this regard is place don ishwari khetan sugar mills (p) ltd. and ors. v. state of uttar pradesh and ors. manu/sc/0069/1980manu/sc/0069/1980 : [1980]3scr331.90. on behalf of the state governments and the agricultural produce marketing committees strong reliance has been placed on tika ramji's case. what is the ratio of these decisions, we will now examine.91. before considering the affronted decisions, it would be appropriate to make it clear that in these matters it has to be kept in view that this court is not examining a case where the field of legislation is on concurrent list to which article 246(2) applies. this court is also not considering the case of an incidental trenching of field by one or the other legislature. the court is concerned with the question of legislative competence. we are examining a case where what has been questioned is the legality of legislation is respect of a field on the state list to which article 246(3) applies. the validity and applicability of the state legislations in respect of a field of legislation on state list has come under a cloud on account of a legislation passed by the parliament in respect of field of legislation under entry 52 of the union list, namely, the tobacco board act, 1975. it is on account of this legislation containing declaration as contemplated by entry 52 of the union list that doubts have arisen about the validity and applicability of state legislation about the sale of agricultural produce of tobacco in market areas and levy thereupon of market fee which aspect are on field of legislation on the state list (entries 14, 27, 28 and 66). entry 24 of the state list is subject to entries 7 and 52 of list i. we are not concerned in these matter with entry 7. the question here is as to the effect of transfer of field of legislation under entry 24 of the state list to the union list (entry 52), on other fields in the state list, namely, fields of legislation under entries 14, 27, 28 and 66 and what is fact can be transferred.92. baijnath kadio was a case which considered the validity of the state legislation on the ground of being beyond the state legislative power n view of the declaration by the parliament in mines and minerals (regulation and development) act. 1957 and contemplated by entry 54 of list i of the seventh schedule to the constitution. section 2 of the central legislation declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the union should take under its control the regulation of mines and the development of minerals to the extent provided therein.93. entry 54 of the union list speaks both of regulation of mines and minerals development and entry 23 of the state list is subject to entry 54. it was held that it was open to the parliament to declare that it is expedient in the public interest that the control should rest with the central government. to what extent such a declaration can go is for the parliament to determine and this must be commensurate with public interest. once this declaration is made and that extent laid down the subject of legislation to the extent laid down becomes an exclusive subject for the legislation by the parliament. any legislation by the state after such declaration trenching upon the field disclosed in the declaration must necessarily be unconstitutional because that field is abstracted from the legislative competence of the state legislature. for its view the constitution bench followed earlier constitution bench decisions in the cases of hingir and tulloch . these two cases also dealt with the scope of entry 54 of list i viz-a-viz entry 23 of list ii. the majority opinion in itc as already noticed, followed baijnath kadio and extracted in its judgment the passage as aforesaid.94. a significant aspect to take note of is that tika ramji's case has not been considered in hingir's case . the reason for it seems to be that one set of cases consider the scope of entry 54 viz-a-viz entry 23 and to that category belong the cases of hingir, tulloch and baijnath kadio . the other set of cases consider the scope of entry 52 of union list viz-a-viz entry 24 of the state list and to that category belong the cases of tika ramji and other cases following tika ramji .95. relying upon ishwari khetan's case mr. shanti bhushan contends that entry 52 has been equated with entry 54 of the union list.96. both sides have relied upon the case of ishwari khetan . let us examine that case. in ishwari khetan's case the contention urged was that the parliament has made the industrial (development and regulation) act, 1951 (for short, 'the idr act') in entry 52 list i declaring control of sugar industry and that industry goes out of entry 24 of list ii and, therefore, state legislature is denuded of legislative powers in respect of sugar industry and impugned legislation was with respect to acquisition of sugar undertaking is sugar industry. the attorney general and contended that the power to acquire property was derived from entry 42 of list iii. ishwari khetan's case involved the determination or scope of entry 52 of list i and entry 24 of list ii only. the scope of these entries with respect to entries 26 and 27 of list ii and entry 33 of list iii did not fall for consideration. further in paragraphs 7, 8 and 11 of ishwari khetan's case the constitution bench repeatedly pointed out that a declaration in entry 52 of list i denudes the power of state legislature to legislate under entry 24 list ii only. it was noticed that the sugar was a declared industry. the question posed was that "is it, however, correct to say that once a declaration is made as envisaged by entry 52 list i, that industry as a whole is taken out of entry 24 of list ii"? the answer given by the constitutional bench was that it is not correct to say that once a declaration is made in respect of an industry that industry as a whole is taken our of entry 24 list ii. it was said that the industry as a legislative head is found itself placed in entry 24 of list ii. the state legislature can be denied legislative power under entry 24 to the extent parliament makes declaration under entry 52 and by such declaration, parliament acquired power to legislate only in respect of those industries in respect of which declaration is made and to that extent as manifested by legislation incorporating the declaration and not more. the bench further said that the legislative power of the state under entry 24 list ii is eroded only to the extent the control is assumed by the union pursuant to the declaration and the state legislature which is otherwise competent to deal with industry under entry 24 list ii can deal with that industry in exercise of other powers enabling it to legislate under different heads set out in list ii and list iii and this power cannot be denied to the state. the extent of parliamentary legislation was seen only to determine how much is taken out from entry 24 list ii and not for the purposes of laying down any principle that the parliamentary legislation has to be seen to determine the extent of control and the denudation of the power of the state legislature to the extent the control is laid down by the parliament. further it was held that despite the parliamentary legislation the state legislature can deal with industry in exercise of other powers in different entries in list ii and list iii and that power cannot be denied to the state in this case the court was examining whether the law of acquisition of sugar undertaking was referable to entry 24 list ii or entry 42 list iii. it was concluded that the acquisition of the property was referable to entry 42 list iii. the scope of the industry did not fall for examination in ishwari khetan's case . there is no discussion on the interpretation of expression 'industry' and that probably is the reason why tika ramji's case has not been referred to. the reliance on baijnath kadio's case in ishwari khetan's case was to show the denudation of states' power being limited to the extent of control. while baijnath kadio's case dealt with entry 23 list ii, ishwari khetan's case dealt with entry 24 list ii. the subject matter of the other entries was not in issue in this decision. the structure in entry 54 of list i was not equated with that of entry 52 list i as contended by mr. shanti bhushan. this decision does not adopt the mines and minerals cases for the purposes of considering the scope of entry 52 of list i. in our view, the cases of mines and minerals are not of much assistance while examining the scope of entry 52 of list i.97. in state of a.p. and ors. v. mcdowell & co. and ors. manu/sc/0427/1996manu/sc/0427/1996 : [1996]3scr721 also it was held that the ambit and scope of a constitutional entry cannot be determined with reference to a parliamentary enactment. if it is otherwise, it would result in the parliament enacting and/or amending an enactment thereby controlling the ambit and scope of the constitutional provision. that cannot be the law. the power to legislate with which we are concerned in contained in article 246. the fields are demarcated in the various entries. on reading both, it has to be decided whether the concerned legislature is competent to legislate when its validity is questioned. the ambit and scope of an entry cannot be determined with reference to a parliamentary enactment.98. tika ramji's case is required to be examined in some detail since that has been a bone of serious and elaborate submissions. in that case, the challenge by the sugarcane growers hailing from several villages of state of u.p. was to the validity of the up sugarcane (regulation of supply and purchase) act, 1953 and notifications issued thereunder. a short history of legislation enacted by the center as well as the province of u.p. in regard to sugar and sugarcane was noticed.99. it was noticed that on 8th april, 1932, the central legislature passed the sugarcane industry (protection) act, 1932. as a result of this act, there was a rapid rise in number of sugar factories as also a large expansion in the cultivation of sugarcane. to regulate the price at which sugarcane intended to be used in the manufacture of sugar might be purchased by or for the factories, the central legislature enacted on 1st may, 1934 the sugarcane act, 1934. the fixing of minimum price for the purchase of sugarcane intended for use in any factory in any controlled area was left to the provincial governments which were empowered to make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the objects of the act including the organisation of growers of sugarcane into co-operative societies for the sale of sugarcane to factories.100. with the coming into operation of the government of india act, 1935, there was distribution of legislative power between the dominion legislature and the provincial legislatures and agriculture (entry no. 20), trade and commerce within the province (entry no. 27) and production, supply and distribution of goods, development of industries subject to the provision in list i with respect to development of certain industries under dominion control (entry no. 29) were included in list ii, namely, the provincial legislative list. entry no. 34 in list i was "development of industries where development under dominion control is declared to be in the public interest".101. the result of above distribution of legislative power was that the entire subject matter of the sugarcane act, 1934 was left with the provincial legislative list. it was left that this act was not sufficiently comprehensive for dealing with the problems of sugar industry. therefore, it was found necessary to replace it so as to provide for better organisation of cane supplies to sugar factories. the u.p. legislature accordingly enacted on 10th february, 1938, the u.p. sugar factories control act, 1938 to provide for licensing of the sugar factories and for regulating the supply of sugarcane intended for use in such factories and the price at which it may be purchased and for other incidental matters and repealed the sugarcane act, 1934. the 1938 act was to remain in force initially upto 30th june, 1947 but the period was extended to 30th june, 1952 and then to 30th june, 1952.102. on intervention of section world war, a proclamation of emergency was issued by the governor general under section 102 of the government of india act, 1935. the dominion legislature acquired the power to make laws for the provinces with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the provincial legislative list. the proclamation of emergency was to operate until revoked by a subsequent proclamation and the laws made by the dominion legislature were to have effect until the expiration of period of six months after the proclamation had ceased to operate. the defence of india act and the rules made thereunder occupied the filed. sugar was made a controlled commodity in the year 1942 and its production and distribution as well as the fixation of sugar prices were regulated by the sugar controller thereafter. the proclamation of emergency was revoked on 1st april, 1946 and the laws made by dominion legislature in the field of the provincial legislative list were to cease to have effect after 30th september, 1946. on 26th march, 1946, the british parliament enacted the india (central government and legislature) act, 1946, section 2(1)(a) whereof provided that notwithstanding anything in the government of india act, 1935, the indian legislature shall during the period mentioned in section 4 thereof have powers to make laws with respect to the following matters:"(a) trade and commerce (whether or not within a province) in, and the production, supply and distribution of, cotton and woollen textiles, paper (including newsprint), foodstuffs (including edible oil seeds and oils), petroleum and petroleum products, spare parts of mechanically propelled vehicles, coal, iron, steel and mica,..."103. acting under the power reserved to it under the aforesaid section 2(1)(a), the central legislature enacted on 19th november, 1946, the essential supplies (temporary powers) act, 1946 to provide for the continuance during the limited period of powers to control production, supply and distribution of, and trade and commerce in, certain commodities. the governor general issued a notification on 3rd march, 1947 the effect whereof was to continue the act till 31st march, 1948. on 18th july, 1947, however, indian independence act was passed under which the governor general passed an order which substituted the words "dominion legislature" for "both houses of parliament" in the proviso to section 4 of india (central government and legislature) act, 1946 and also introduced a new section 4(a) by way of adoption providing that the powers of the dominion legislature shall be exercised by the constituent assembly. by passing of the resolution by the constituent assembly, the life of the act was extended and later on constitution coming into force, the parliament was invested with power under article 369 for a period of five years to make laws with respect to the following matters as if they were enumerated in the concurrent list."(a) trade and commerce within a state in, and the production, supply and distribution of,.... foodstuffs (including edible oil seeds and oil),....' the life of the act was accordingly extended from time to time upto 26th january, 1955 by acts passed by parliament.104. food crops under the aforesaid 1946 act were defined as including corps of sugarcane.105. the central government in exercise of powers conferred upon it by section 3 of the 1946 act, promulgated the sugar and gur control order, 1950, inter alia, empowering it to prohibit or restrict the export of sugarcane from any area; to direct that no gur or sugar shall be manufactured from sugarcane except under and in accordance with the conditions specified in the licence issued in this behalf. there was also power to fix minimum price in exercise whereof the central government from time to time issued notifications fixing the minimum price to be paid by the producers of sugar for sugarcane purchased by them.106. on 31st october, 1951, parliament enacted the industries (development and regulation) act, 1951 to provide for the development and regulation of certain industries. by section 2 of the act, it was declared that it was expedient in the public interest that the union should take in its control the industries specified in the first schedule. that schedule included the industry engaged in the manufacture or production of sugar.107. the u.p. legislature enacted the impugned act. the object of this enactment was stated to be as follows:"with the promulgation of the industries (development and regulation) act, 1951 with effect from 8th may, 1952, the regulation of the sugar industry has become exclusively as central subject. the state government are now only concerned with the supply of sugarcane to the sugar factories. the bill is being introduced in order to provide for a rational distribution of sugarcane to factories, or its development on organized scientific lines to protect the interests of the cane growers and the industry and to put the new act permanently on the statute book."108. in exercise of the rule making power conferred by the impugned act, the u.p. government made rules and also promulgated the u.p. sugarcane supply and purchase order, 1954. all these related to the supplies and purchase of sugarcane in u.p.109. challenging vires of the state act one of the submissions made in tika ramji's case before the constitution bench was:"(1) that the state of u.p. had no power to enact the impugned act as the act is with respect to the subject of industries the control of which by the union is declared by parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest within the meaning of entry 52 of list i and is, therefore, within the exclusive province of parliament. the impugned act is, therefore, ultra vires the powers of the state legislature and is a colourable exercise of legislative power by the state."110. it was urged that the word 'industry' was a word of very wide import and included not only the process of manufacture or production but also of things which were necessarily incidental to it, viz., the raw materials for the industry as also the products of that industry and would, therefore, include within its connotation the production, the supply and distribution of raw materials for that industry which meant sugarcane i n relation to sugar industry and, therefore, insofar as the impugned act purported to legislate in regard to sugarcane which was a necessary ingredient in the production of sugar, it was a colourable exercise of legislative power by the state, ostensibly operating in its own filed within entry 27 of list ii but really trespassing upon the field of entry 52 of list i.111. true, the challenge was to the vires of the state legislation and not to the parliamentary legislation but at the same time the entire basis of challenge was that in respect of the sugarcane, only parliament had the power to legislate on account of the filed being covered under entry 52 of list i, the sugar industry having been included in that entry and the connotation of industry being very wide to include in it raw material, i.e., sugarcane as well. thus, the exclusive power of parliament to legislate was urged as the main ground to seek invalidation of the state legislation -- the filed of sugarcane not being available to the state legislature to legislate.112. in view of the controversy as aforesaid, the fact that the validity of the parliamentary legislation was not in issue in tika ramji's case, does not in any manner, affect the ratio of that decision. the point for determination in that case was substantially the same as in the present case, namely, the scope of the expression 'industries' in entry 52 of list i and entry 24 of list ii. there also the point was to adopt a narrow or wide interpretation of the expression 'industry'. further, the fact that it was a case of a manufacturing industry under idr act also does not affect the ratio of the case. the interpretation placed in tika ramji's case cannot be confined to industry falling under idr act alone. there is neither any express or implied indication in that decision to limit the interpretation nor there is any valid reason to so limit it.113. like tika ramji's case, in these matters, the challenge is to the state legislations on the ground that in view of entry 52 of list i, on enactment of tobacco board act, 1975, the state legislature loses competence to legislate in respect of sale of tobacco and, therefore, the existing state legislations will have no applicability and, thus, the legislations in respect of marketing under entry 28 of list ii would have no applicability insofar as it concerns the agricultural produce 'tobacco'.114. the opposite contention is that under entry 14 of the state list the state is competent to legislate in respect of agricultural produce and tobacco is an agricultural produce; setting up of markets in respect of this produce under entry 28 and levying thereupon the fee under entry 66 and subject to entry 33 of list iii production, supply and distribution of goods (entry 27) are all state subjects and that under entry 52 of list i, the parliament's competence is only to legislate in respect of industry which would not include in its ambit the raw material of the industry and that the process of sale of agricultural produce of tobacco in markets and levying thereupon market fee can never be part of industrial process which is only manufacture and production. the contention of mr. dwivedi is that state's activity in question is not an industrial activity and, therefore, it is outside the ambit of entry 24 of state list and entry 52 of the union list.115. in tika ramji's case, the precise argument to challenge the state enactment was that the expression 'industries' should be construed as including not only the process of manufacture or production but also activities antecedents thereto such as acquisition of raw material and subsequent thereto such as disposal of the finished products of that industry. it was urged in that case that the process of acquiring raw materials was an integral part of the industrial process and was, therefore, included in the connotation of the word 'industry' and when the central legislature was invested with the power to legislate in regard to sugar industry on account of declaration as postulated by entry 52 of list i, that legislative power included also the power to legislate in regard to the raw material of the sugar industry, that is sugarcane, and the production, supply and distribution of sugarcane was, by reason of its being the necessary ingredient in the process of manufacture or production of sugar, within the legislative competence of the central legislature.116. the petitioners in tika ramji's case in support of the wide construction to be placed upon the expression 'industry' also relied upon various decisions interpreting the said term in relation to the industrial disputes act. dealing with those cases in tika ramji's case this court said:"what we are concerned with here is not the wide construction to be put on the term 'industry' as such but whether the raw materials of an industry which form an integral part of the process are within the topic of 'industry' which forms the subject matter of item 52 of list i as ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly or reasonably be said to be comprehended in that topic and whether the central legislature while legislating upon sugar industry could, acting within the sphere of entry 52 of list i, as well legislate upon sugarcane."117. this court said that if the legislation with regard to sugarcane came within the exclusive province of the central legislature under entry 52 of list i, the enactment passed by the provincial legislature would be ultra vires. it was said :"if both the central legislature and the provincial legislature were entitled to legislate in regard to this subject of production, supply and distribution of sugarcane, there would arise no question of legislative competence of the provincial legislature in the matter of having enacted the impugned act. the conflict, if any, arose by reason of the interpretation which was sought to be put on the two entries, entry 52 of list i and entry 27 of list ii put in juxtaposition with each other. it was suggested that item 52 of list i comprised not only legislation in regard to sugar industry but also in regard to sugarcane which was an essential ingredient of the industrial process of the manufacture or production of sugar and was, therefore, ancillary to it and was covered within the topic. if legislation with regard to sugarcane thus came within the exclusive province of the central legislature, the provincial legislature was not entitled to legislate upon the same by having resort to entry 27 of list ii and the impugned act."118. dealing with the argument of wide import of the expression 'industries' in tika ramji's case it was held that 'industry' in its wide sense of the term would be capable of comprising three different aspects : (1) raw materials which are an integral part of the industrial process, (2) the process of manufactures or production, and (3) the distribution of the products of the industry. after noticing these different aspects of the term 'industry', it was held that "the raw materials would be goods which would be comprised in entry 27 of list ii". in respect of the second category of process of manufacture or production and the third aspect of distribution of the product of the industry, the court held :"the process of manufacture or production would be comprised in entry 24 of list ii except where the industry was a controlled industry when it would fall within entry 52 of list i and the products of the industry would also be comprised in entry 27 of list ii except where they were the products of the controlled industries when they would fall within entry 33 of list iii."119. the court further held that "in no event could the legislation in regard to sugar and sugarcane be thus included within entry 52 of list i".120. thus, rejecting the contention that the expression 'industries' in entry 52 of list i is wide enough to take into its compass the power to legislate in respect of raw material said to be an integral part of the industrial process, the court repelled the plea of the state act being ultra vires, the same being covered by the subject of sugar industry control whereof have been declared by the parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest under the exclusive domain of parliament.121. in the calcutta gas company (proprietary) ltd. v. the state of west bengal and ors. manu/sc/0238/1961manu/sc/0238/1961 : (1961)iillj431sc , the challenge was to the constitutional validity of the oriental gas company act, 1960. one of the ground of challenge was that the west bengal legislature was not competent to make a law regulating the gas industry in view of declaration as contemplated by entry 52 of list i having being made by the parliament in idr act -- entry 24 being subject to the provisions of entry 52 of list i. it was contended that entry 25 of list ii (gas & gas works) must be confined to matters other than those covered by entry 24 of the same list.122. on the facts of the case and in view of the conclusions of the constitution bench on other aspect, it was not considered necessary to attempt to define the expression 'industry' precisely or the state exhaustively all its ingredients but following tika ramji's case, it was assumed that the expression 'industry' means only production or manufacture. in calcutta gas, which considers entry 52 of list i and entry 24 of list ii, the bench said that ordinarily 'industry' is in the field of the state legislation and in all the entries it must be given the same meaning and cited with approval tika ramji's case in the following words:"in tika ramji v. state of uttar pradesh, the expression 'industries' is defined to mean the process of manufacture or production and does not include the raw materials used in the industry or the distribution of the products of the industry. it was contended that the word 'industry' was a word of wide import and should be construed as including not only the process of manufacture or production but also activities antecedent thereto such as acquisition of raw materials and subsequent thereto such as disposal of the finished products of that industry. but that contention was not accepted."123. mr. shanti bhushan, however, contends that once field is covered by entry 52 by issue of requisite declaration and the parliament has actually covered the field by enacting a legislation, with regard to that extent the industry including all facets of such an industry -- whether it is the raw materials or the products of that industry, the state legislature will have no power to legislate. the contention is that the expression 'industries' in entry 52 of the union list comprises in it all its aspects commencing from procurement of raw material and upto disposal of final product of that industry and not only the process of manufacture or production. the submission of learned counsel is that if the expression 'industries' in the entries under consideration is not given such interpretation, it would denude the parliament of real object of control of such industry in public interest which is of paramount importance. as against this, the contention of the other side is that the acceptance of the viewpoint propounded by mr. shanti bhushan would mean denuding the state legislature the power to legislate in respect of fields covered under various entries under the state list which are not made subject to any other entry and that the acceptance of contention of mr. shanti bhushan would have the effect of rewriting the constitution. i agree. the intention of the constitution makers was not to make entries 14, 27, 28 and 66 subject to entry 52 of the union list. the acceptance of viewpoint propounded by mr. shanti bhushan will have that effect. therefore, the expression 'industries' cannot be interpreted in the manner suggested.124. true, the parliamentary legislation has supremacy as provided under article 246(1) and (2). this is of relevance when field of legislation is on concurrent list. while maintaining parliamentary supremacy, one cannot give go by to the federalism which has been held to be a basic feature of the constitution (see s.r. bommai v. union of india manu/sc/0444/1994manu/sc/0444/1994 : [1994]2scr644 .125. the constitution of india deserves to be interpreted, language permitting, in a manner that it does not whittle down the powers of state legislature and preserves the federalism while also upholding the central supremacy as contemplated by some of its articles.126. in this background, let us also briefly notice the constitutional history and structural inter-relationship in respect of relevant entries as they existed in government of india act, 1935 and as they now exist in the seventh schedule. entries 27 and 29 on the state list in the government of india act, 1935 were as under:"item 27. trade and commerce within the province; markets and fairs; money lending and money lenders.item 29. production, supply and distribution of goods; development of industries, subject to the provisions in list i with respect to the development of certain industries under federal control."127. now, in seventh schedule part of entry 27 is in entry 26 of the state list; markets and fairs is entry 28 of list ii; money lending and money lenders (entry 30 list ii); production, supply and distribution of gods subject to the provisions to entry 33 of list iii (entry 27 list ii); industries subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of list i (entry 24, list ii). it would, thus, be seen that under 1935 act, both production, supply and distribution of goods as well as development of industries were subject to the provisions of list i as provided in entry 29. our constitution makers, however, bifurcated entry 29 into two parts. industries were put in entry 24 of list ii subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of list i. the production, supply and distribution of goods was put in entry 27 of list ii and made subject to entry 33 of list iii. the acceptance of the argument of mr. shanti bhushan would mean that no object was sought to be achieved by such a bifurcation. it is clear that two entries have been separated. one made subject to the provisions of entry 33 of list iii and the other subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of list i. therefore, to interpret the expression 'industry' to include in it the aspect of raw material would mean that by the same analogy the subject matter of production supply and distribution of goods should also be included therein and in fact that was the argument of mr. shanti bhushan. would the acceptance of that argument not negate the will of the constitution makers. i think it would. therefore, the argument cannot be accepted. the same argument would equally apply to entry 14 of list ii in respect of agriculture which is not subject to any list. it would so become if we accept the contention of mr. shanti bhushan. further, earlier when the parliament felt the need to control raw material, it included "raw jute and raw cotton" in entry 33, list iii by constitution third amendment act, 1954. even article 369 indicates that agricultural raw material is in the state list for it refers to raw cotton, cotton seed and edible oil seeds and seeks to temporarily place it, by fiction, in the concurrent list to enable parliament to make laws. the expression 'industries' in entry 24, list ii or entry 52, list i, cannot be interpreted in a manner that would make other entries of list ii of the seventh schedule subject to union control, which in fact they are not. wherever it was intended to be made subject to such control, whether of list i or that of list iii, it was said so. a perusal of list ii shows that whenever a particular entry was intended to be made subject to an entry in list iii, it has been so stated specifically. therefore, an interpretation which tends to have the effect of making a particular entry subject to any other entry, though not so stated in the entry, deserves to be avoided unless that be the only possible interpretation. we do not think that such an interpretation on the entries in question, namely, entry 52 of the union list and entry 24 of the state list deserves to be placed.128. the principles of interpretation are well settled. there is no doubt that the entries in the lists in the seventh schedule do not provide competence or power to legislate on the legislature for which the source of power is contained in article 246 of the constitution. in deciding question of legislative competence, it has to be kept in view that the constitution is not required to be considered with a narrow or pedantic approach. it is not to be construed as a mere law but as a machinery by which laws are made. the interpretation should be broad and liberal. the entries only demarcate the legislative field of respective legislature and do not confer legislative power as such and if it is found that some of the entries overlap or in conflict with the other, an attempt to reconcile such entries and bring about a harmonious construction is the duty of the court. when, however, reconciliation is not possible, as here, then the court will have to examine the entries in relation to legislative power in the constitution.129. the subject matter of the issue here is about the interpretation of entry 52 in list i of the seventh schedule. it requires the parliament to make a declaration by law identifying an industry, the control of which by the union is expedient in the public interest. under the said entry only an 'industry' can be declared as an industry, the control whereof by the union is regarded as expedient in public interest. it is, therefore, implicit that if an activity cannot be regarded as industry, entry 52 will have no applicability to that activity. the question is about the concept of 'industry' in entry 52 of list i. as already stated, the entries in the legislative list have to be construed in the widest sense cannot be disputed but it has also to be borne in mind that such construction should not make other entries totally redundant. the meaning of the word 'industry' in various dictionaries reliance on which was placed by mr. shanti bhushan, is not of any assistance while considering the constitutional meaning of the said term. there may not be any embargo to limitation on the power of the parliament to enact the law in respect of activities other than manufacturing activities but that power is non-existence in entry 52 of list i. it may be elsewhere. reference in this regard can be made to entry 33 of list iii including in its ambit food stuff and certain raw materials. tobacco, however, is admittedly not a food stuff.130. the validity of certain other acts such as the cardamom act, 1965, the central silk board act, 1958, the coffee act, 1942, the rubber act, 1947, the tea act, 1953, the coir industry act, 1953 and the coconut development board act, 1979 reference whereof was made by mr. shanti bhushan need not be examined for purposes of considering the legislative competence of the impugned state legislations. the legislative competence of parliament to legislate these statutes is not in issue before this court and, therefore, we do not think it necessary to examine the question of legislative competence only from academic view point insofar as these legislations are concerned. however, prima facie, there is no substance in the apprehension expressed by mr. shanti bhushan that narrow approach of the concept of 'industry' would make these acts beyond the legislative competence of the parliament and make them ultra vires. as, when and it these acts are challenged, the question of legislative competence would be examined. further, it may be noted that two out of the aforesaid legislations, namely, the coffee act, 1942 and the rubber act, 1947 are pre-constitution enactments made under the government of india act, 1935 where the entries were different. item 29 of list ii of the said act has already been reproduced above. in respect of the coir industry act, on examination of the provisions contained therein, it may be possible to urge that the statute deals with the process of manufacturing and does not seek to control plantation and preservation of the coconut trees or the production of the coconut. the central silk board act has been dealt with by this court in the case of b. vishwanathiah & co. and ors. v. state of karnataka and ors. manu/sc/0602/1991manu/sc/0602/1991 : [1991]1scr305 and i fail to appreciate how upholding the validity of the agricultural produce marketing acts would effect the validity of this enactment. in respect of cardamom act, it appears that the said act is being applied for export purposes and it does not cover soil preparation of seed-lings. regarding coconut development act, it does not envisage setting up of auction platform and controlling marketing as in the present case. that enactment primarily deals with the field pertaining to recommendation for improving marketing, providing financial assistance for adoption of modern technology and for assisting growers to get incentive prices. this court, however, need not examine in detail the aspect of legislative competence in regard to these enactments since, as already said, that is not the matter in issue here and it would suffice to indicate, as above, only the prima facie view to dispel the apprehension expressed by mr. shanti bhushan.131. harakchand ratanchand banthia and ors. v. union of india and ors. manu/sc/0038/1969manu/sc/0038/1969 : [1970]1scr479 has been strongly relied upon by mr. shanti bhushan to support the contention of wide interpretation of the expression 'industry'. the main question therein was about the legislative competence of the parliament to enact the gold (control) act, 1968. the said act defines gold to mean gold, including its alloy (whether virgine, melted or re-melted, wrought or unwrought), in any shape or form, of a purity of not less than nine carats and including primary gold, article and ornament [section 2(j)]. clause (r) of section 2 defines 'primary gold' to mean gold in any unfinished or semi-finished form and includes ingots, bars, blocks, slabs, billets, shots, pellets, rods, sheets, foils and wires. challenging the constitutional validity of the gold (control) act, the contention urged was that the goldsmiths was a handicraft requiring application of skill and the art of making ornament was not an industry within the meaning of entry 52 of list i of the seventh schedule of the constitution. the constitution bench noticed the established principles that the widest aptitude should be taken of all the entries and the duty of the court to reconcile the entries and bring about a harmonious construction in case some entries in different list or in the same list may overlap or may appear to be in direct conflict with each other. in the present case, however, there is no question of any overlapping and in regard to conflict and harmonious construction, it is mr. shanti bhushan's own submission that the two legislations to the extent this court is concerned, cannot co-exist.132. reliance has been placed by mr. shanti bhushan on the following passage from banthia's case:"but we are satisfied in the present case that the manufacture of gold ornaments by goldsmiths in india is a 'process of systematic production' for trade or manufacture and so falls within the connotation of the word 'industry' in the appropriate legislative entries. it follows, therefore, that in enacting the impugned act parliament was validly exercising its legislative power in respect of matters covered by entry 52 of list i and entry 33 of list iii."133. the contention of learned counsel is that in harakchand ratanchand banthia's case, the process of systematic production for trade or manufacture has been held to fall within the connotation of the word 'industry' in the appropriate legislative entry and the argument that if the word 'industry' is construed in the wide sense, entry 27 of list ii will lose all meaning and content was rejected. the submission is that the same approach deserves to be adopted in the present case as well. the above approach was adopted after finding the activity to be manufacture or production and, therefore, falling within the connotation of 'industry'. in banthia's case, the constitution bench, in fact, cited with the approval tika ramji's case and referred thereto as under:"in tika ramji v. state of uttar pradesh the expression 'industry' was defined to mean the process of manufacture or production and did not include raw materials used in the industry or the distribution of the products of the industry."134. in banthia's case, the court was considering the validity of the act, the object whereof was to control production, manufacture, supply, distribution, use and possession of, and business in, gold, ornaments and articles of gold and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. there is no provision in the gold (control) act, 1968 regulating the manner in which the primary gold would be extracted from the earth. the act does not concern itself with the extraction of primary gold. the question therein was as to whether the work of goldsmiths was a handicraft requiring application of skill and whether the art of making gold ornaments was not in 'industry' within the meaning of entry 52, list i. in that case, the question was not whether dealing with the raw material of industry would come or not, within the concept of industry'. further, the court observed that it is not necessary to attempt to define the expression 'industry' precisely or to state exhaustively all its different aspects. on the facts of the case, the constitution bench held that the process or systematic production of gold ornament by goldsmiths for trade or manufacture falls within the connotation of the word 'industry' in the appropriate legislative entry. the decision in tika ramji's case was not departed from. in fact it was referred to. an attempt to adopt the definition of the word 'industry' in the industrial disputes act was repelled. the contention accepted was that the manufacture of gold ornament was an 'industry' within the meaning of entry 52, list i. this decision is not of any assistance for determining whether sale of tobacco process can come within the of the tobacco industry so as to fall within the ambit of the word 'industry' in entry 52 of list i and entry 24 of list ii. the observation in banthia's case that entry 27 of list ii was a general entry made in the context of manufacture of gold ornaments by goldsmiths falling within the ambit of the word 'industry' as contained in entry 24 of list ii and entry 52 of list i. banthia's case does not express any opinion on the scope of the word 'industry' in entry 52 of list i and tika ramji's case still holds the field when it says that the expression 'industry' would mean the process of manufacture or production and would not include any raw material used in an industry or the distribution of the products of industry.135 mr. shanti bhushan has also placed reliance on another decision of the constitution bench in the case of chaturbhai m. patel v. the union of india and ors. manu/sc/0012/1959manu/sc/0012/1959 : 1978(2)elt297(sc) , in particular, to the observations made therein by sir maurice gwyer, chief justice in subramanyan chettiar v. muthuswamy goundan [1940 fcr 188] which have been cited in patel's case. the said observations read thus:"it must inevitably happen from time to time that legislation, though purporting to deal with a subject in one list, touches also on a subject in another list, and the different provisions of the enactment may be so closely intertwined that blind adherence to a strictly verbal interpretation would result in a large number of statutes being declared invalid because the legislature enacting them may appear to have legislated in a forbidden sphere."136. reliance was also placed on the observations of justice hidayatullah in state of rajasthan v. g. chawla & anr. manu/sc/0141/1958manu/sc/0141/1958 : 1959crilj660 as cited with approval in the case of chaturbhai m. patel.those observations are:"it is equally well-settled that the power to legislate on a topic of legislation carries with it the power to legislate on an ancillary matter which can be said to be reasonably included in the power given."137. we have no difficulty in accepting the aforesaid observations made by sir maurice gwyer, chief justice and hidayatullah, j (as the then was) but it has to be borne in mind that the question for determination in chaturbhai m. patel's case was regarding true nature and character or the pith and substance of the impugned act, namely, sections 6 8 9 and 10 of the central excuse and salt act, 1944 and rules 140 to 148, 150, 171 to 181, 215 and 226 of the central excise rules, the constitutional validity whereof was under challenge. the constitution bench was considering the constitutional validity of a fiscal measure to levy and realise duty on tobacco. the contention was that section 6 and 8 of the impugned act and rules made thereunder were beyond the legislative competence of the central legislature under the government of india act, 1935. the court was examining the question whether the impugned act is a law with respect to matters enumerated in item 45 of list i under the 1935 act or to the matters enumerated in items 27 and 29 of list ii. entries 27 and 29 have already been reproduced above. they dealt with the power of the state to legislate in respect of trade and commerce, markets and fairs, money lending and money-lenders. item 29 dealt with power to legislate in respect of production, supply and distribution of goods, development of industries, subject to the provisions in list i with respect to the development of certain industries under the federal control. the question was whether the impugned act in pith and substance relate to duties of excise on tobacco as contained in item 45 or it falls within the boundaries of items 27 and 29 of the provincial list. referring to the decision of the federal court, it was held that in the interpretation of the scope of these items, widest possible amplitude must be given to the words used and each general word must be held to extend to ancillary or subsidiary matters which can be fairly said to be comprehended in it. on examination of the provisions of the central excise act, the court came to the conclusion that various provisions of the act and the rules were essentially connected with the levying and collection of the excise duty and in its true nature and character the act remains one that falls under item 45 of list i and the incidental trenching upon the provisional field of items 27 or 29 would not affect the constitutionality because the extent of invasion of the provisional field may be a circumstance to determine the true pith and substance but once that question is determined, the act would fall on the side of central field and not that of the provincial field. it is, thus, evident that since in pith and substance the matter pertained to excise duty, it fell under item 45 of list i and the non-tax entries in item 27 or 29 could not be invoked. in the constitution also, entry 84 relates to duty of excise on tobacco and other goods manufactured or produced in india.138. referring to the argument of the petitioner based on rule 181 which dealt with revocation and suspension of licenses and empowered the licencing department to revoke or suspend a licence under certain circumstances and the argument that it was the field under the province of the provincial legislature, the court said that this rule may have an indirect effect of depriving an owner of a bonded warehouse from the privilege of keeping such a warehouse but that does not mean that the object of the act is not imposition, collection or realization of duty of excise. the rule was held to be "a mean of making the realization of duty effective and necessarily incidental to effectual legislation for collection of duties". in the present case, there is no question of any incidental trenching. it cannot be said that the law relating to sale of tobacco in market area is incidental to law regarding tobacco as enacted by tobacco board act. the decision in chaturbal m. patel's case, in our opinion, has no relevance for the present purpose and so also the decision in the case of state bank of india v. yasangi venkateswara rao manu/sc/0027/1999manu/sc/0027/1999 : [1999]1scr213 . the question squarely involved here is about the interpretation of the expression 'industry' within the meaning of entry 52 of list i and entry 24 of list ii.139. in ganga sugar corporation ltd. v. state of u.p. and ors. manu/sc/0397/1979manu/sc/0397/1979 : [1980]1scr769 the constitutional validity of u.p. sugarcane purchase act was challenged on the ground that it invades entry 52 of list i with respect to sugar industry which is a controlled industry under the idr act, 1951. the question raised therein was this : "is the legislation ultra vires because the state enters the forbidden ground by enacting on controlled industry"? it was undisputed that sugar industry was a controlled industry within the meaning of entry 52 of list i of the seventh schedule and, therefore, the legislative power of parliament covered enactments with respect to industries having regard to article 246(1) of the constitution. the court said that if the impugned act invades entry 52, it must be repulsed by the court. the court, however, expressed surprise at the argument of invalidity of the act despite the decision of the constitution bench in tika ramji's case. the court said that the constitution bench decision must be accepted as final unless the subject be of such fundamental importance to national life or the reasoning is so plainly erroneous in the light of later thought that it is wiser to be ultimately right rather than to be consistently wrong. it said that the pronouncement by the constitution benches should not be treated so cavalierly as to be revised frequently. recalling the words of chief justice roberts of the u.s. supreme court in smith v. alwright (321 us 649 at 669 "that adjudications of the court were rapidly gravitating "into the same class as a restricted railroad ticket, good for this day and train only". that part of tika ramji's case was referred which dealt with the contention regarding the word 'industry' being of wide import and included not merely manufacture but also the raw material for the industry and rejection of this contention. paragraphs 31, 31a and 32 deal with tika ramji's case and rejection of the argument as to whether raw material of an industry which form an integral part of the process are within the topic of 'industry' which forms the subject matter of item 52 of list i. the bench said:"the edifice of exclusive parliamentary jurisdiction so built stood on shifting sands. the semantic sweep of entry 52 did not come in the way of the state legislature making laws on subjects within its sphere and not directly going to the heart of the industry itself."140. the submission of mr. shanti bhushan, who appeared in ganga sugar corporation's case also, to reconsider tika ramji's case was rejected. the court said:"tika ramji notwithstanding, the contention was advanced by shri shanti bhushan that 'industry' was a pervasive expression, ambient enough to embrace raw materials used for the industry and so, sugar industry, as a topic of legislation, vested in parliament exclusive power to legislate on sugar-cane supplies to sugar factories, and pursuing this expansionist logic, any taxation on supplies of cane to mills would be legislation on sugar industry. ergo the purchase tax act was a usurpation by the u.p. legislature breaching the dykes of article 246(1) read with entry 52 of list i. he expanded on the theme by urging that any legislation which affected sugar industry by taxing its raw materials was one with respect to that industry. the tika ramji ratio is diametrically opposed to this reasoning and a ruling which has stood the field so long has been followed by another constitution bench as late as 1973 in the kannan devan hills co. v. state of kerala manu/sc/0543/1972manu/sc/0543/1972 : [1973]1scr356 and its force of logic has our deferential assent and cannot be brushed aside by a mere appeal for reconsideration. shri shanti bhushan candidly conceded that if tika ramji were good law, his submission was still-born. we agree."141. the court further held that:" 'industry' as a legislative topic is of large and liberal import; true. but what peripherally affects cannot be confused with what goes to the heart. an acquisition of land for sugar mills or of sugar mills may affect the industry but is not an action in the legislative field forbidden for the states (see the kannan devan hills produce company ltd. case). sales tax on raw materials going to a factory may affect the costing process of the manufacture but is not legislation on industrial process or allied matters affect topics reserved for parliament a situation of reductio ad absurdum may be reached."(emphasis supplied is ours)142. the effect of acceptance of the submission of mr. shanti bhushan may also denude the state of its power to legislate even in respect of sales tax on tobacco. such a contention was specifically rejected in ganga sugar corporation's case.143. in the kannan devan hills produce v. the state of kerala and anr. manu/sc/0543/1972manu/sc/0543/1972 : [1973]1scr356 challenge was laid to the constitutional validity of kannan devan hills (resumption of lands) act, 1971 for want of legislative competence of the state. the contention urged was that sections 4 and 5 of the impugned act are a law with respect of entry 52 of list i of the seventh schedule as these provisions regulate the carrying on of tea industry, within the competence of the parliament, by controlling the land for tea plantation. it was urged that if the effect of legislation is to control the working of the tea plantation, the legislation must be regarded as legislation with respect to entry 52 list i. tika ramji's case was cited with approval. repelling the contention, it was held that the state had legislative competence to legislate on entry 18, list ii and entry 42, list iii and this power cannot be denied on the ground that it has some effect on industry controlled under entry 52, list i. the constitution bench further said that if a state act, otherwise valid, has effect on a matter in list i, it does not cease to be a legislation with respect to an entry in list ii or list iii. it said that effect is not the same thing as subject matter. the object of sections 4 and 5 seems to be to enable the state to acquire all lands which do not fall within the categories (a), (b) and (c) of section 4(1). these provisions are really incidental to the exercise of the power of acquisition. the state cannot be denied the power to ascertain what land should be acquired by it in the public interest.144. in b. viswanathiah & co. and ors. v. state of karnataka and ors. manu/sc/0602/1991manu/sc/0602/1991 : [1991]1scr305 the challenge was to the validity of the provisions of mysore silkworm seed and cocoon (regulation of production, supply and distribution) act, 1959 (act 5 of 1960). the contention urged on behalf of the petitioners in that case was that any legislation in respect of silk industry can be enacted only by the parliament and the state legislature is incompetent to legislate on the matter because section 2 of the central silk board act enacted a declaration in terms of entry 52, list i. the effect of it was to remove the silk industry from the purview of the state legislature powers thus, rendering the state legislature incompetent to legislate on that topic. the high court repelled the challenge relying upon the decision of this court in tika ramji, ganga sugar corporation ltd., harakchand ratanchand banthia kannan devan hills produce company's cases. after noticing that the high court on the basis of series of decisions of this court regarding scope of entry 52 of list i in the seventh schedule of the constitution had repelled the challenge, this court expressed full agreement with the views of the high court. it was held that the control of industry vested in parliament was restricted to the aspect of production and manufacture of silk yarn or silk. it did not obviously take in the earlier stage of industry, namely, the supply of raw materials. for instance, even in regard to the silk industry, the reeling, production, development and distribution of silkworm seeds and cocoons was regulated by the state act. these items can be perhaps legitimately described as raw materials of the silk industry. the control being vested in parliament under entry 52 of silk industry did not affect the control over these raw materials. it was held that the control, supply and distribution of the goods produced by the industry was the third aspect of industry which falls outside the purview of the control postulated under entry 52. in other words, though the production and manufacture of raw silk cannot be legislated upon by the state legislature in view of the provisions of the central act and the declaration in section 2 thereof, that declaration does not in any way limit the powers of the state legislature to legislate in respect of goods produced by the silk industry. this court said that "to interpret entry 52 otherwise would render entry 33 in list iii of the seventh schedule to the constitution otiose and meaningless". the same would be the position in the present case.145. the acceptance of the argument of mr. shanti bhushan would make various entries in the state list otiose and meaningless and subject to entry 52 of list i despite the fact that the entries are not so worded.146. in indian aluminium company ltd. and anr. v. karnataka electricity board and ors. manu/sc/0424/1992manu/sc/0424/1992 : [1992]3scr213 challenging the amending act by the state, the contention urged before the high court was that:"aluminium industry is scheduled industry under the control of the government of india as declared by industries development and regulation act and hence falls under entry 52 of list i of viith schedule of the constitution. therefore, the policy of government of india amounts to direction issued to the state government which they are bound to obey. consequently the agreement of 1976 is an agreement protected by a law coming under entry 52 of list i, terms of which cannot be varied by a law enacted by a state by virtue of the power conferred by the concurrent list (list iii of viith schedule). the amending act should be construed in such a way as not to impinge on or detract from the law, statutory order or constitutional direction of the central government, otherwise the said amending act will lack legislative competence."147. the high court relying upon the decision in tika ramji's case, where the concept of industry as a topic of legislation was explained, repelled the aforesaid contention. the decision and reasoning given by the high court upholding the vires of the amending act relating to the concept of industry as explained in tika ramji's case were upheld by this court.148. in shriram industrial enterprises ltd. v. the union of india and ors. manu/up/0041/1996manu/up/0041/1996 : air1996all135 a full bench of allahabad high court examined the validity of u.p. sheera niyantran adhiniyam, 1964 (u.p. act no. xxiv of 1964) on the question of the competence of the state legislature. its validity had been challenged by the sugar industry. it was urged that by virtue of section 18g of the idr act, the state legislature stood denuded of power to legislate regulating supply, distribution and supplies of molasses -- a product of sugar industry and was consequently incompetent to enact sections 7 8 and 10 of the aforesaid state act. the full bench tracing the history of legislation leading to framing of the constitution held that if the argument about denuding of power of state legislature is accepted, most of the entries in lists ii and iii would be meaningless. once the parliament makes a declaration under entry 52 of list i, for instance, entries 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24 would be redundant. the high court said that neither it was the intention of the framers of the constitution nor the said contention is born out from the perusal of entry 52 and the other entries of lists ii and iii of the seventh schedule. noticing various decisions of this court, the high court concluded as under:"applying the principles propounded by the apex court in the cases mentioned above, it is apparent that the state legislature is competent to make law in respect of the subject industries under entry 24 of the list ii subject to entries 7 and 52 of list i of the seventh schedule and is further competent to enact law on the subject "trade and commerce within the state and production, supply and distribution of goods," under entry 26 and entry 27 of list ii subject to entry 33 of list iii of seventh schedule of the constitution. but on declaration under entry 52 of list i by parliament in respect of the industries the control of which by the union is by law held to be expedient in the public interest, three consequences flow. firstly, on declaration by parliament in respect of controlled industries the power of state legislature to legislate under entry 24 of list ii shifts of entry 52 of list i to the extent of control provided in the act. the second result which follows upon declaration is that the power to enact law by state legislature under entry 26 and entry 27 of the list ii of seventh schedule becomes part of entry 33 of list iii which is a concurrent list. third consequence that follows on declaration is that the products of the controlled industries would fell within entry 33 of list iii.the controversy before me, if examined seeing the constitutional debate, history of legislation, structure and design of the relevant entries and also keeping in view the basic structure of the constitution, the only irresistible conclusion is that section 18g of the idr act is referable to entry 33 of list iii of the seventh schedule. since the power to enact in respect of production, supply and distribution of the products of the controlled industries being a concurrent subject, the u.p. legislature is competent to enact the adhiniyam of 1964."149. the structure and scope of entry 54 of the union list and entry 23 of the state list and their inter-relationship is substantially different from the scope and structure of entry 24 of the state list and entry 52 of the union list. the entry relating to of mines and minerals has in it both the industry of mines and its product minerals and, therefore, on a declaration both miens and minerals get embedded in entry 54 of the union list. therefore, it has been consistently held by this court, that by declaration under entry 54, the parliament evinces an intention to occupy the whole field.150. in my view the full bench rightly held that the cases relating to miens and minerals relied upon in support of the challenge to the state legislation were of no assistance. the full bench decision was approved by this court in siel ltd. and ors. v. union of india and ors. manu/sc/0601/1998manu/sc/0601/1998 : air1998sc3076 .151. in belsund sugar co. ltd. v. state of bihar and ors. manu/sc/0457/1999manu/sc/0457/1999 : air1999sc3125 , the constitution bench examined the question regarding the legality of levy of market fee under the provisions of bihar agricultural produce markets act, 1960 pertaining to various commodities including sugarcane, sugar and molasses, wheat and tea. the court first dealt with the transaction of purchase of sugarcane by the sugar factories functioning in the market areas falling within the jurisdiction of respective market committees constituted under the market act. it noticed that the market act had been enacted by the bihar legislature as per the legislative power vested in it by entries 26, 27 and 28 of list ii of the seventh schedule of the constitution. the court, however, noticed that the market act dealt with supply and distribution of the goods as well as the trade and commerce therein as it seeks to regulate the sale and purchase of agricultural produce to be carried on in the specified markets under the act. to that extent, the court said, the provisions of entry 33 of list iii override the legislative powers of the state legislature in connection with legislations dealing with trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution of goods. thus, to the extent to which the market act seeks to regulate the transactions of sale and purchase of sugarcane and sugar which are foodstuffs and trade and commerce therein, the constitution bench said that it has to be held that the market act being enacted under the topic of legislative powers under entries 26, 27 and 28 of list ii will be subject to any other legislation under entry 33 of the concurrent list. the contention of mr. dwivedi being that as admittedly the tobacco is not foodstuff and does not fall under entry 33 of list iii, like the amendment to the constitution made in 1953, the parliament by further amendment of the constitution can, if so advised, place tobacco -- raw material of the industry - in entry 33 of list iii and, thus, confer on itself the competence to legislate in respect to tobacco, need not be examined by this court as being unnecessary. we may, however, note that the constitution bench, after noticing various provisions of the act and the rules, came to the conclusion that the need for regulating the purchase, sales, storage and processing of sugarcane, being an agricultural produce, is completely met by the comprehensive machinery provided by the sugarcane act enacted by the same very legislature which enacted the general act being the market act.152. in belsund sugar co. ltd. one of the contentions urged was that under the idr act, in public interest, union of india had taken over the control of the wheat industry as specified in the first schedule to the act and consequently and transaction of purchase and sale of the product of that industry cannot be regulated by the state act. the constitution bench noticed that the parliament in exercise of its legislative power under entry 52 of list i of the seventh schedule had enacted the idr act and flour industry is listed as one of the scheduled industries under the caption "food-processing industries". the bench said that the production of wheat as a raw material or its sale is not covered by the said act and, consequently, so far as wheat as 'agricultural produce' is concerned, it is outside the sweep of the idr act. the question still remained whether the sale of flour or any other product out of wheat can be said to be covered by the sweep of the idr act. it was noticed that the central government had not promulgated any statutory order under section 18g covering the field. the court rejected the contention that mere existence of a statutory provision in the act enabling the central government to issue such order would be sufficient to occupy the field contemplated by the provision. while examining the decision in hingir-rampur coal company's case on which reliance was placed by the appellants, the constitution bench held that it has to be kept in view that any legislation in exercise of legislative power under entry 54 of list i would enable the parliament to regulate mines and the minerals development by taking them under the control of the union in public interest. thus, all aspects of the mining industry would be covered by the general sweep of such a declaration. but it was noticed that the idr act was enacted under entry 52. it was held that the scheme of entry 54 of the union list read with entry 23 of the state list was entirely different from the scheme of entry 52 of list i read with entry 24 of list ii with which the court was concerned in that case. on conjoint reading of these two entries, the ratio of the decision in hingir-rampur coal company's case, it was held, cannot be effectively pressed into service.153. as already noticed, the majority decision in itc case for the view it took had placed reliance on baijnath kadio which followed hingir-rampur coal company's case.154. further in belsund sugar company, the constitution bench cited with approval the decision in seil case and reiterated that merely because industry is controlled by a declaration under section 2 of the idr act enacted by entry 52 of the union list, the state legislature would not be denied of its power to regulate the products of such an industry by exercise of its legislative power under the state list. it would be useful to extract para 119 of belsund sugar company's case as under:"however, so far as the idr act is concerned, it is enacted under entry 52 of the first schedule which deals with industries in general. simultaneously in the state list itself there is entry 24 which deals with industries subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of list i. consequently, the products of such controlled industries would necessarily not be governed by the sweep of the general legislation pertaining to such industries as per entry 52 of the union list. the aforesaid constitution bench judgment was not concerned with any state legislation enacted under entry 24. on the contrary, it dealt with legislation of the union parliament under entry 54 of the union list read with entry 23 of the state list. the scheme of the aforesaid legislative entries is entirely different from the scheme of entry 52 of the list i read with entry 24 of list ii with which we are concerned. on a conjoint reading of the aforesaid two entries, therefore, the ratio of the decision of the constitution bench in the aforesaid case cannot be effectively pressed into service by shri ranjit kumar for supporting his contention. in this contention, we may usefully refer to a decision of this court in siel ltd. where one of us, sujata v manohar j. was a member. it has rightly distinguished the ratio of the constitution bench decision in the case of hingir rampur coal co. ltd. and taken the view that merely because an industry is controlled by a declaration under section 2 of the idr act enacted by entry 52 of the union list, the state legislature would not be denied of its powers to regulate the products of such an industry by exercise of this legislative powers under entry 24 of the state list. in that case the question was whether the u.p. sheera niyantran adhiniyam, 1964 could be said to be repugnant to the molasses (control) order issued by the central government under section 18-g of the idr act imposing restrictions on the sale of molasses and fixing the maximum price of molasses. answering the question in the negative, it was held that the term 'industry' in entry 24 would not take within its ambit trade and commerce or production, supply and distribution of goods which are within the province of entries 26 and 27 of list ii. similarly, entry 52 in list i which deals with industry also would not cover trade and commerce in, or production, supply and distribution of the products of those industries which fall under entry 52 of list i. for the industries falling in entry 52 of list i, these subjects are carved out and expressly put in entry 33 of list iii. it was also held that since the molasses (control) order of 1961 passed by the central government in exercise of powers conferred by section 18-g was not extended at any point of time to the state of u.p. or the state of bihar, the question of repugnancy between the molasses control order, 1961 and the u.p. sheera niyantran adhiniyam, 1964 does not arise. consequently, it must be held that in the absence of a statutory order promulgated under section 18-g of the idr act, it cannot be said that the field for regulation of sale and purchase of products of the flour industry like atta, maida, suji, bran, etc. would remain outside the domain of the state legislature."(emphasis supplied is ours)155. the principles aforesaid would equally apply to entries 14, 27, 28 and 66 of list ii. it may further be noticed that in para 170 of belsund sugar company's case , the constitution bench reiterates the view expressed in tika ramji's case as also in siel's case affirming full bench of the allahabad high court in m/s. shriram industrial enterprises (supra).156. in view of the above, i see no compelling reason either on account of any binding precedent in the form of a earlier constitution bench judgment, history and background of the framing of the constitution or the words used in various entries or the language of any article in the constitution of india, to take a view which will result in denuding the power of state legislatures to legislate not in respect of field of legislation under entry 24 but field of legislation covered by other entries on state list on making of declaration under entry 52 of the union list. the constitution bench judgment in the case of tika ramji and other decisions following it confine the field of legislation of industries to 'the process of manufacture or production' and not to 'raw materials' which may be integral part of industrial process or to the 'distribution of the product of the industry'.in view of the aforesaid, i conclude as under:1. the state legislations and the tobacco board act, 1975 to the extent of sale of tobacco in market area cannot co-exist.2. the state legislatures are competent to enact legislations providing for sale of agricultural produce of tobacco in market area and for levy and collection of market fee on that produce.3. the parliament is not competent to pass legislation in respect of goods enumerated in aforesaid conclusion no. 2 while legislating in the field of legislation covered by entry 52 of the union list under which the parliament can legislate only in respect of industries, namely, 'the process of manufacture of production' as held in tika ramji's case. the activity regarding sale of raw tobacco as provided in the tobacco board act cannot be regarded as 'industry'.4. itc's case manu/sc/0109/1985manu/sc/0109/1985 : 1986crilj155 is not correctly decided.157. leave in special leave petitions granted. for the aforesaid reasons, the state legislations are held to be valid pieces of legislation. the appeals and the writ petition are disposed of accordingly. parties to bear their own costs.brijesh kumar, j.158. i have the privilege of going through the judgments, separately prepared by my esteemed colleagues brother g.b. pattanaik, brother y.k. sabharwal, and mrs. ruma pal, j.j.159. in all the three judgment, the facts as well as the relevant provisions of the law and the decisions on the subject have been very elaborately and lucidly discussed. hence, it would not be necessary to go into those matters all again. the main question, however, which has been considered is as to whether the case itc ltd. v. state of karnataka manu/sc/0007/1985manu/sc/0007/1985 : 1985 supp. 1 s.c.r. 145 has been correctly decided or not. in the above cited case, it has been held that once tobacco industry, in the public interest, was declared as such under entry 52 of list 1 of viith schedule of the constitution, the state legislature ceased to be competent to legislate on the subject viz. tobacco industry, in conflict with the laws made by the parliament, namely, the tobacco board act 1975. the state act of karnataka levying market fee on sale of tobacco in the market area was thus held to be invalid. the whole legislative field in relation to the subject of tobacco including its sale as an agricultural produce was held to have vested in the parliament. while holding so reliance was placed on the decisions of this court reported in state of orissa v. m. a. tullock & co. manu/sc/0021/1963manu/sc/0021/1963 : [1964]4scr461 and baij nath kedia v. state of bihar and ors. manu/sc/0352/1969manu/sc/0352/1969 : [1970]2scr100 . mr. justice mukherjee, however took a different view holding that both acts namely the tobacco board act 1975 and the karnataka agricultural produce market act could operate together without offending each other. therefore, the other question for consideration before this bench has been as to whether provisions of the two acts viz. tobacco board act and state act could operate together or not.160. different states namely bihar, u.p., tamil nadu and others have similar state legislations levying market fee on sale of agricultural produce including tobacco. the same question arose for consideration in respect of these states as well, in one way or the other.161. brother pattanaik, in his judgment has found that the itc case (supra) has been correctly decided, though reasons for holding so were slightly different than the reasons on the basis of which the judgment was rendered in the itc case . it has been further held that once parliament takes over the control of a particular industry in the interest of the said industry as well as in the national interest, the control should be effective and should be in such a manner that the desired object can be achieved. therefore, whole legislative field was open to the parliament to legislate on the subject of tobacco industry including growing of tobacco as well as its sale and purchase. it has also been held that in any case, entrenching into the legislative field of an entry in the other list on a matter which may be ancillary or incidental thereto, would not invalidate the legislation. on the other question it has been found that the two acts namely tobacco board act 1975 and the state agricultural produce marketing act cannot operate simultaneously.162. brother sabharwal, j., has broadly held that the decision in tika ramju v. state of up manu/sc/0008/1956manu/sc/0008/1956 : [1956]1scr393 holds good for the purposes of meaning to be assigned to the expression 'industry' occurring in entry 52 of list i. the pre manufacture activity relating to growing and sale of tobacco cannot be subject matter of legislation by the parliament by virtue of declaration of tobacco industry under entry 52 of list i of the viith schedule. the power of state legislation to legislate on the subject in the list ii of the viith schedule e.g. entry 14, 28 etc. remains unaffected. it has also been held that the state act and the central act cannot operate simultaneously whereas hon'ble ruma pal j. has also found that power of the state legislature to make laws relating to tobacco as agricultural produce, its sale and levy of market fee was not affected since it cannot be said to be covered by the expression "industry" in entry 52 of list-i of the viith schedule. the i.t.c case (supra) has been held to be wrongly decided. it has however been held that the tobacco board act 1975 and the state act can simultaneously operate without offending each other. in case it may not be possible, the provisions of markets act and not the tobacco act would prevail.163. as noticed earlier the majority view in the itc case (supra) has been upheld in the judgment of brother pattanaik, on slightly different reasoning and the decisions of this court in m.a. tullock and baij nath kedia (supra) dealing with legislation on mining and relied upon in the majority judgment of itc case (supra) have been found to be not relevant for the decision. it is true, while legislating on any subject covered under an entry of any list, there can always be a possibility of entrenching upon or touching the field of legislation of another entry of the same list or another list for matters which may be incidental or ancillary thereto. in such eventually, inter alia, broad and liberal interpretation of an entry in the list may certainly be required. an obsolete or watertight compartmentalization of heads of subject for legislation may not be possible but at the same time entrenching into the field of another entry cannot mean its total sweeping off even though it may be in the exclusive list of heads of subjects for legislation by the other legislature. as in the present case the relevant heads of subject in list ii, other than entry 24, cannot be made to practically disappear from list ii and assumed to have crossed over in totality to list i by virtue of declaration of tobacco industry under entry 52 of list i, in the guise of touching or entrenching upon the subjects of the list ii.164. i therefore, append my full agreement with the conclusions and judgment of brother sabharwal j. on all points.the courtin keeping with the conclusions of the majority, expressed in the judgments of sabharwal, ruma pal and brijesh kumar, jj., it is held that:(1) itc's case [1985 supp. (1) scc 476] was not correctly decided.(2) the state legislatures are competent to enact legislation providing for the levy and collection of a market fee on the sale of tobacco in a market area. consequently, the market acts enacted by the states are valid.(3) the state legislations and the tobacco board act, 1975, to the extent that they relate to the sale of tobacco in market areas, cannot co-exist and the former prevail over the latter.the appeals and the writ petition are disposed of accordingly. no order as to costs.g.b. pattanaik, j.165. leave granted in all the special leave petitions.166. i.t.c. limited filed a writ petition under article 226 and 227 of the constitution of india before the patna high court against an order of assessment passed by the agricultural produce market committee, monghyr, demanding a sum of rs. 25,87,072/-, inter alia on the ground that the purchase of unprocessed tobacco leaves from the growers, being the subject matter of the levy, the market committee has no power to levy and collect fee. the stand taken before the high court was that tobacco leaves neither having been bought or sold within the market area and the power to levy and collect market fee under section 27 of the bihar agricultural produce markets act, being on the agricultural produce bought or sold in the market area, the market committee was not entitled to levy market fee. the division bench however without entering into the aforesaid controversy, came to the conclusion that no clear notice appears to have been given to the company to produce the records for the purpose of satisfying the market committee that the tobacco leaves in question were either not processed or exported from the market area and, therefore, the company must be given afresh opportunity of adducing all the relevant documents before the market committee to escape the presumption arising out of proviso to section 27 of the act. the high court having remitted the matter to the market committee for passing a fresh assessment order, the company has approached this court, which is the subject matter in civil appeal no. 6453 of 2001 arising out of slp (civil) no. 12374/84. when the special leave petition was listed before a bench of this court in february, 1987, the judgment of this court in i.t.c. ltd. etc. v. state of karnataka , reported in manu/sc/0007/1985manu/sc/0007/1985 : 1985 supp. (1) s.c.r. 145 had been placed. the bench tentatively being of the view that the decision of this court requires reconsideration directed that the matter be placed before a constitution bench of five judges and that is how the matter has been placed before the constitution bench. subsequent to the bihar case, similar cases arising out of judgment of other high courts on being assailed before this court, those cases also have been tagged on to this case. when this batch of cases had been earlier listed before a constitution bench and arguments had been advanced on behalf of company, the court felt that it would be appropriate to issue notice to the attorney general and the advocate generals of all the states, as most of the states have their state act called the agricultural produce market act and pursuant to the order of this court dated 10th of april, 2001, notices were issued to advocate generals of all the states as well as to the ld. attorney general, whereafter this case has been heard by this bench.167. different state legislatures have enacted agricultural produce and markets act for regulating sale and purchase of the agricultural produce within the market area and for levy and collection of market-fee. parliament having declared that it is expedient in the public interest that union should take under its control the tobacco industry, enacted the tobacco board act, 1975 which is an act to provide for the development of tobacco industry under the control of the union government. under the agricultural produce markets act, the state government having notified 'tobacco' as an agricultural produce, the purchase and sale of tobacco is to be regulated under the provisions of the state act and the market committee has the right to levy and collect market-fee on such sale and purchase of the notified agricultural produce viz. the tobacco. in a case arising from the state of karnataka, this court by a majority of 2:1, came to hold that the tobacco industry having been taken over by the central government under entry 52 of list i and having passed the tobacco board act, the state legislature ceases to have any jurisdiction to legislate in that field and, therefore, the provisions contained in the karnataka act, entitling the market committee to levy market-fee in respect of sale and purchase of tobacco within the market area directly, collides with the tobacco board act, 1975 and as such the state act so far as it relates to tobacco was struck down. the minority view expressed by justice mukherjee was however to the effect that both acts can operate in their respective fields and there is no repugnancy if both the acts are considered in the light of their respective true nature and character. the majority view relied upon the decisions of this court in state of orissa v. m.a. tulloch and co. manu/sc/0021/1963manu/sc/0021/1963 : [1964]4scr461 and baij nath kedia v. state of bihar and ors. manu/sc/0352/1969manu/sc/0352/1969 : [1970]2scr100 .168. the other matter, arising out of the judgment of patna high court is one filed by agricultural produce market committee, against a similar order as in civil appeal no. 6453 of 2001, remanding the matter for making a fresh assessment order, after issuing notice to the itc. so far as civil appeals arising out of the judgment of allahabad high court is concerned, the division bench of allahabad high court followed the judgment of this court in itc v. the state of karnataka 1985 supp l. scc 476, and held that mandi samiti cannot charge a market fee on sale and purchase of tobacco, and consequently krishi utpadan mandi samiti has preferred the appeals in question. civil appeal no. 3872 of 1990 also arises out of a judgment of allahabad high court and the tobacco merchants' association and ors., are the appellants. the full bench of allahabad high court considered the constitutional validity of u.p. krishi utpadan mandi adhiniyam, 1964, and came to hold, that the adhiniyam permitting levy and collection of fee under section 17(iii), in so far as it applies to tobacco, is not repugnant to the provisions of tobacco board act and further held that the decision of the supreme court in ram chander kailash kumar v. state of u.p. is binding, notwithstanding the subsequent decision of the supreme court in the case of itc v. state of karnataka (supra), and therefore, the tobacco merchants' association has assailed the legality of the aforesaid full bench decision. so far as the state of tamil nadu is concerned, the tamil nadu agricultural marketing board has assailed the judgment of the division bench of the high court as the high court followed the judgment of this court in the itc case and held that the state legislature has no legislative power or competence to notify tobacco for the purpose of control and regulation and levy market fee under the provisions of tamil nadu regulation act, 1959. in fact the high court held that the ratio of majority opinion in itc case squarely applies and, therefore, the state legislature of tamil nadu has no legislative power to notify or provide for notifying tobacco for the purpose of control, regulation and levy of fee or other charges under the provisions of tamil nadu agricultural produce markets act, 1959.169. jayalakshmi tobacco company filed a civil writ petition no. 8614 of 1982 under article 32, challenging the constitutional validity of certain provisions of karnataka agricultural produce marketing (regulation) act, 1966, on the ground that in view of tobacco board act, 1975 and tobacco association act, 1975, the entire field regarding the development to tobacco industry including the marketing of tobacco was occupied and the state legislation is repugnant to the central act.170. so far as 12 appeals arising out of the judgments of madhya pradesh high court are concerned, the high court of madhya pradesh followed the judgment of this court in the itc case and held that the market committee will not be entitled to realise any market fee in relation to the trade with regard to tobacco since the market committee act is repugnant to the tobacco board act. it may be stated that though the writ petition had been filed challenging the constitutional validity of the state act, the high court held the m.p. krishi utpadan mandi adhiniyam 1972 as amended by m.p. krishi utpadan mandi sanshodhan adhiniyam, 1986 to be valid.171. mr. shanti bhushan, learned senior counsel appeared for itc, and argued, that the majority view in the decision of itc case is correct and once parliament has made a law relating to tobacco industry, which provides for the manner and place of sale as well as levy of fee on the sale, the market committee act enacted by the state legislature, providing levy of fee for sale of the tobacco within the market area will be repugnant to the central law, and therefore, the state act, so far as it deals with tobacco, must be held to be ultra vires.172. mr. rakesh dwividi, the learned senior counsel, appearing for the state of bihar, on the other hand contended that the majority decision in the case must be held to the contrary to several constitutional bench decisions of this court starting from tika ramji v. state of u.p. manu/sc/0008/1956manu/sc/0008/1956 : [1956]1scr393 and the word 'industry' in entry 52 of list i must be given a limited meaning. so construed, according to mr. dwividi, the parliament cannot be said to have legislative competence to make law in relation to growing of raw tobacco, or even sale thereof, and to that extent the tobacco board act must be held to be invalid. according to him the state legislature was fully competent to enact the agricultural market committee act, and providing therein for levy of fee for sale and purchase of agricultural produce including tobacco. apart from the main arguments, advanced by these two learned senior counsel, several other counsel appearing for market committee, namely, mr. ashok ganguli, appearing in tamil nadu case, dr. a.m. singhvi, appearing for market committee, monghyr, mrs. shobha dikshit, appearing for krishi mandi of farukhabad, mr. pramod swarup appearing in the case arising out of the judgment of allahabad high court, mr. g.l. sanghi appearing for krishi mandi in the madhya pradesh batch of appeals, supported the arguments advanced by mr. dwivedi. mr. g.l. sanghi, the learned senior counsel appearing for madhya pradesh krishi mandi, in m.p. batch of appeals submitted for re-conciliation of both the acts, and contended that there exists no repugnancy and both acts can be allowed to operate. mr. trivedi, the learned additional solicitor general, appearing for the attorney general of india, however, contended, that the constitutionality of tobacco act, not having been assailed in any of these cases, the court need not embark upon an enquiry with regard to the competence of parliament to enact the tobacco board act under entry 52 list i of the viith schedule. he also further contended, that the tobacco industry having been notified, as an industry, the control of which the parliament thought it expedient to be taken over in the public interest, and the tobacco board act having been enacted, there cannot be any limitation for exercise of power of the parliament even in relation to the growing of tobacco or sale of tobacco at specified place as well as levy of fee for such sale, and in that view of the matter, the market committee act providing levy of market fee on sale and purchase of tobacco within the market area must be struck down. it is true, as contended by the learned additional solicitor general that constitutional validity of the tobacco board act had not been assailed in any of these cases, and only in this court, mr. rakesh dwivedi, the learned senior counsel, appearing for the state of bihar raised the contention in view of the judgment of this court in itc case. ordinarily, this court does not embark upon an enquiry on the constitutionality of the legislation if that had not been assailed. but taking into account the procedure, that had already been adopted, and noticing all the advocate generals and the attorney general, in view of the amplitude of arguments advanced by the counsel for the parties, we do not think it appropriate to dispose of this batch of cases without examining the constitutional validity of the tobacco board act, enacted by the parliament under entry 52 of list i. in fact the main thrust of the rival contention centers round the same.173. mr. shanti bhushan, learned senior counsel appearing for the itc ltd. contended, that entry 52 of list i of the viith schedule of the constitution requires the parliament to make a declaration by law identifying an industry, the control of which is expedient to be taken over by the union in the public interest. once such a declaration is made by the parliament, the entire gamut would be within the legislative competence of parliament to make law, and the very industry having been made the subject of legislation, the parliament gets exclusive power under article 246(1) of the constitution. article 246(1) itself being, notwithstanding anything in clauses 2 and 3 of such article, once parliament makes a law in relation to control of an industry in respect of which a declaration has been made, the state legislature will be denuded of its power to make any law in respect of that industry. mr. shanti bhushan contends, that every entry in the legislative list has to be construed in its widest sense, as was held by this court in harakchand ratanchand banthia and ors. etc. v. union of india and ors. manu/sc/0038/1969manu/sc/0038/1969 : [1970]1scr479 , and even privy council has also laid down the said proposition. there is, therefore, no rational to give restrictive meaning to the expression 'industry' in entry 52 of list i of the viith schedule. the learned counsel placed reliance on the meaning of the word 'industry' contained in encyclopedia of britannica, which indeed is too wide and submitted, the court cannot and ought not give a restricted meaning to the expression so as to denude the legislative authority to make law on the subject. the learned counsel made a reference to laws made by the parliament, on a declaration being made in terms of entry 52 of list i, namely, the cardomon act, 1965; the central silk board act, 1958; the coffee act, 1942; the rubber act, 1947; the tea act, 1953; the coir industry act, 1953; the coconut development board act, 1979 and the tobacco board act, 1975. the learned counsel urged that the industries (development & regulation) act, 1951, had declared only certain manufacturing industries, but that by itself will not denude the parliament of its legislative competence to make law over any industry once a declaration, in terms of entry 52 of list i is made, vesting the entire control over the industry with the union government. according to mr. shanti bhushan, the constitution bench decision in harakchand's case manu/sc/0038/1969manu/sc/0038/1969 : [1970]1scr479 : [1970]1scr479 , fully answers this question. the learned counsel contends that the entries in the three lists are only the heads of fields of legislation demarcating the area over which the appropriate legislature can operate. the legislative entries must be given a large and liberal interpretation, reason being that the allocation of subjects to the lists is not by way of scientific or logical definition but is a mere enumeration of broad and comprehensive categories. according to mr. shanti bhushan, in the constitution bench decision of this court in harakchand (supra) while construing the expression 'industry' in entry 52 of list i the wider definition of the industry in the webster's dictionary has been approved and, therefore, there is no justification in giving the expression any restrictive meaning. the learned counsel also urged that in the very same case, construing entry 27 of list ii, the court observed that the entry industry is a special entry while entry 27 dealing with production, supply and distribution of goods is a general entry. mr. shanti bhushan contends that the word 'industry', if has been held to be a special entry, whether in entry 24 of the list ii or entry 7 and entry 52 of list i, law made under that entry must prevail over any law which could be referable to a general entry. according to mr. shanti bhushan, applying the ratio in harakchand (supra), it must be held that the majority view in the itc case is correct. mr. shanti bhushan further urged, a particular industry, in respect of which a declaration is made by the parliament in terms of entry 52 of list i, the industry itself having become a subject of parliamentary legislation, any provision contained therein, which have a reasonable nexus would be within the legislative competence of the parliament under article 246(1) of the constitution and would be valid. according to the learned counsel, a law dealing with the raw-material of a declared industry cannot be held to be having no nexus with the industry itself and if the parliament would be denuded of this power to make law, dealing with raw-material of the declared industry then the very purpose of making a declaration and taking over the control of the industry in the interest of the public would be frustrated. if the parliament does not choose to cover all aspects of that industry and may confine the regulation of that industry only with regard to the manufacturing part, as was done in the industries (development & regulation) act, 1951, then certainly there would be no repugnancy even if the state legislature makes a law dealing with the raw materials of the notified industry, provided the state law is referable to any of the entries in list ii. so far as the observations made by the constitution bench in tikaramji's case (supra), mr. shanti bhushan contends that the articles relatable to the scheduled industry were finished products and not raw materials and therefore (sic) at all purport to cover or have any provisions therein relating to sugarcane. it was in this context the observations came to be made by this court in tikaramji's case (supra) that the expression 'industry' will have a limited meaning. mr. shanti bhushan also placed reliance on the constitution bench decision in chaturbhai m. patel v. union of india -- manu/sc/0012/1959manu/sc/0012/1959 : 1978(2)elt297(sc) which dealt with the legislative competence under the government of india act, 1935. the court was, in that case examining the question, whether the central excise act was beyond the legislative competence under the government of india act, 1935. on examining entry 45 of the union list and entries 27, 29 and 31 of the state list, the court held that the examination should be as to whether the act in question, is a law with respect to matters enumerated in item 45 of list i, or to the matters enumerated in items 27 and 29 of list ii. quoting the observations of federal court to the effect;"it must inevitably happen from time to time that legislation, though purporting to deal with a subject in one list, touches also on a subject in another list, and the different provisions of the enactment may be so closely intertwined that blind adherence to a strictly verbal interpretation would result in a large number of statutes being declared invalid because the legislature enacting them may appear to have legislated in a forbidden sphere"174. approved the same and held that it was a correct method of interpreting the various items in different lists. mr. shanti bhushan also pointed out that in the aforesaid judgment the constitution bench followed the earlier observations of hon'ble hidaytullah, j. in the case of state of rajasthan v. g. chawla manu/sc/0141/1958manu/sc/0141/1958 : 1959crilj660 to the effect;"it is equally well settled that the power to legislate on a topic of legislation carries with it the power to legislate on an ancillary matter which can be said to be reasonably included in the power given".175. according to the learned counsel, it would be within the competence of the central legislature to provide for matters which may otherwise fall within the competence of the state legislature if the are necessarily incidental to effective legislation by the central legislation on a subject of legislation expressly within its power. according to mr. shanti bhushan, if the expression 'industry' is construed in the wide sense, in which it was construed by this court in the constitution bench judgment of harakchand (supra) then the provisions of tobacco board act of 1975 would certainly be within the legislative competence of parliament, notwithstanding the fact that some of those provisions may touch upon subjects contained in the state lists. the learned counsel, in this connection also placed reliance on a recent decision of this court in the case of state bank of india v. yasangi venkateswar rao manu/sc/0027/1999manu/sc/0027/1999 : [1999]1scr213 . with reference to the decisions of this court in calcutta gas manu/sc/0308/1961manu/sc/0308/1961 : [1962]2scr1 , the mcdowell manu/sc/0427/1996manu/sc/0427/1996 : [1996]3scr721 : [1996]3scr721 and tikaramji (supra), the learned counsel contended, that in none of these cases, the competence of parliament to make any law was under consideration. on the other hand, both in calcutta gas (supra) case and in mcdowell (supra) case, what was under consideration is as between the two entries, if one is general and the other is special then which law would prevail, and the court held that the special law would prevail over the general law. in calcutta gas case the word 'industry' in entry 24 was held to be a general entry, whereas word 'gas and gas works' in entry 27 was held to be special entry and applying the principle of harmonious interpretation the court held that the expression 'industry' (sic) given a limited scope so as to exclude from its ambit (sic) and gas works, and it is in this sense, it was held that from the expression 'industry' in entry 24 in list ii the gas and gas works must be excluded. in mcdowell's case (supra) also the court applied the same principle of special excluding general and held that the production and manufacturing of liquor would not fall under entry 24 of list ii but under entry 8 of the list ii, which relates to intoxicating liquor that is to say that the production, manufacture, possession, transport, purchase and sale intoxicating liquors. according to the learned counsel, these decisions will have no relevance in the context of the present case, where the competence of the parliament to make any law within the ambit of entry 52 of list i is the subject matter of scrutiny. mr. shanti bhushan also urged, that entry 27 of the state list relating to production, supply and distribution of goods cannot be held to be a special entry so as to be excluded from the purview of entry 52 of list i. according to him the two entries do not form the part of the same genus so as to apply in the same field, and if the ratio in the judgment in harakchand (supra) case is applied then entry 27 cannot be held to be a special entry. he also relied upon the constitution bench judgment in waverly jute mills case manu/sc/0004/1962manu/sc/0004/1962 : [1963]3scr209 : [1963]3scr209 , where the court was required to examine the competence of the parliament to enact forward contract regulation act, 1952, and whether it encroached upon the subject matter falling under entry 26 and entry 28 of list ii. the court upheld the validity of the law by holding that the parliament has legislative competence under entry 48 of list i relating to stock exchanges and future markets, and in fact it has the exclusive competence. mr. shanti bhushan contended, that apart from the fact that in tikaramji (supra), in calcutta gas (supra), mcdowell (supra) the competence of the parliament to make law had not been assailed, and on the other hand, what was under consideration is whether the central act and the state act could be held to cover different fields so that there was no repugnancy between the two. it was further contended that the state acts would be ultra vires as they related to subject which were brought to the union list by a declaration in terms of entry 52. mr. shanti bhushan contends, that all the decisions in which constitutional validity of parliamentary enactment was questioned on the ground of ambit of entry 52 of list i, the court has upheld the validity of the same as in harakchand (supra). any incidental observation where the competence of parliament to make law was not under assail cannot be relied upon for the proposition that the expression 'industry' in entry 52 of list i must have a restricted meaning. with special reference to tikaramji's case (supra) the learned counsel contended that the court was not examining the scope of word 'industry', as contained in entry 52 of list i, as is apparent from the discussions at page 414 of the scr, but was examining the question, whether raw-materials of an industry which from an integral part of the process are within the topic of 'industry' which forms the subject-matter of item 52 of list i as ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly or reasonably be said to be comprehended in that topic and whether the central legislature while legislating upon sugarcane industry could act within the scope of entry 52 of list i, and would as well legislate upon sugarcane. the observations of the learned judge at page 420 of the report, according to mr. shanti bhushan, are only in that context and when the court did not go into the question as to whether the word 'industry' could or could not have a wide meaning which could be applied when parliament purported to cover other aspects apart from the manufacturing processes, it would not be appropriate to hold that the word 'industry' in' entry 52 of list i must be given a restricted meaning. according to the learned counsel in tikaramjis (supra) the court was considering the question of repugnancy and it answered by comparing the provisions of industries (development and regulation) act with the provisions of up regulation of sugarcane act and found that there was no repugnancy and two were covering two different fields and could therefore co-exist. it is urged that a restricted meaning, being give to the expression 'industry' in entry 7 and 52 of list i or entry 24 of list i will have disastrous consequences, inasmuch as the parliament would declare by law a particular industry to be necessary for the purposes of defence or for the prosecution of war under entry 7, and yet in such law, cannot make any provision in respect of raw-materials or growth of any item, which may be absolutely necessary for the industry in question.176. according to mr. shanti bhushan, the learned senior counsel, the majority judgment in itc case, no doubt, relied upon the decisions of this court in state of orissa v. m.s. tulloch - manu/sc/0021/1963manu/sc/0021/1963 : [1964]4scr461 and baijnath kedia v. state of bihar - manu/sc/0352/1969manu/sc/0352/1969 : [1970]2scr100 , for the proposition that, when the central government takes over an industry under entry 52 of list i and passes an act to regulate the legislation, the state legislature ceases to have the jurisdiction to legislate in that field, and if it does so, then it would be ultra vires of the powers of the state legislature as the entire field is occupied by the central legislation. the case of tulloch (supra) as well as the case of baijnath (supra) deal with the laws made by the parliament under entry 54 of list i of the viith schedule and the court was examining those laws and the legislative competence vis-a-vis entry 23 of list ii, but those principles laid down in tulloch's case (supra) as well as in baijnath's case (supra) would equally apply to the legislation made under entry 52 of list i, as has been held by this court in paragraph 11 of ishwari khetan sugar mills v. state of u.p. manu/sc/0069/1980manu/sc/0069/1980 : [1980]3scr331 judgment. the learned counsel stated that what has been stated therein, that on a law being made by the parliament in respect of a particular industry the state's legislative power would stand denuded only to the extent that any aspect related to that industry is actually covered by the parliamentary legislation. in other words, it is necessary to examine the extent of coverage by the parliament enactment, as has been held in ganga sugar , and the extreme argument advanced in the case that the industry as a subject by itself goes out of the competence of the state legislature, was not accepted. according to mr. shanti bhushan, it is a well settled principle, once a parliamentary legislation is enacted, whether in exercise of its competence under entry in list i or list iii, or there is an incidental or ancillary coverage over some entries in the state list, and there is any repugnancy between the law made by the parliament and law made by the state legislature, then it is only the parliamentary law to the extent of repugnancy which has to prevail and not the state legislation. on the question of the re-conciliation between the tobacco board act and the agricultural market committee act, and in relation to the provisions contained in section 31 of the tobacco board act to the effect, - "provisions of this act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force", the learned counsel contends, the aforesaid provision by no stretch of imagination can be construed to mean, that notwithstanding the state legislation being repugnant to the parliamentary law, yet the state legislation will be permitted to operate. according to the learned counsel, section 31 of the tobacco board act purports to declare that if a law which was consistent with the tobacco board act and made additional requirement of some kind, laid down under any other act, it should not be taken as if in respect of any matter relating to tobacco, all other acts whether consistent or inconsistent with the tobacco act will cease to prevail. in other words, if there is any field which is not covered by the tobacco board act, and if there was some other valid provision, then the tobacco board act would not come in the way. in support of this contention mr. shanti bhushan relied upon the decision in m. karunanidhi v. union of india manu/sc/0159/1979manu/sc/0159/1979 : 1979crilj773 , wherein in paragraph 57 this court in unequivocal terms expressed the intention that the state act which was undoubtedly the dominant legislation would only be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force, which manifestly includes the central acts, namely the indian penal code, the corruption act and the criminal law (amendment) act. in analysing the provisions of the tobacco board act, the counsel contends, that the intention of the parliament is to cover the field of trade in tobacco. relying upon the constitution bench decision in belsund sugar company manu/sc/0457/1999manu/sc/0457/1999 : air1999sc3125 : air1999sc3125 , the learned counsel contends that if a special act deals with regulating trade in an article, it has to go out of the sweep of the agricultural markets act. in this view of the matter, the tobacco board act having been a special act regulating the sale and purchase of the agricultural produce, namely, tobacco and the marketing act, being of a general nature, the marketing act will cease to operate in respect of tobacco. analysing different provisions of the tobacco board act, 1975 and the bihar agricultural produce marketing act the counsel urged, that the provisions cannot co-exist and, therefore, the majority view in itc case rightly held that the agricultural market committee act, framed by the state legislature is ultra vires.177. mr. nageshwar rao, learned senior counsel appearing for the tobacco merchants' association, reiterated all that had been argued by mr. shanti bhushan, and placing reliance upon several authorities submitted, that the tobacco board act being a special act, enacted by parliament for controlling the tobacco industry and making provision therein, relating to growing of tobacco and purchase or sale of tobacco, which have direct nexus with the tobacco industry, the general provisions of the agricultural produce market act will have to give way to the tobacco board act, and therefore, the market committee would have no power to levy market fee by taking recourse to the provisions of the market committee act on the purchase and sale of tobacco within a market area.178. mr. rakesh dwivedi, learned senior counsel, who led the main argument by contending that the parliament had no competence to make the tobacco board act in its entirety, particularly in relation to growing and raw-materials of the tobacco industry, appearing for the state of bihar contended, that the subject matter 'industry' in entry 52 of list 1 of the viith schedule cannot be construed to be all pervasive and the constitution bench of this court in tikaramji (supra) conclusively held that the raw-materials which are integral part of the industrial process cannot be included in the process of manufacture or production. according to mr. dwivedi, the court should construe a particular entry in the schedule in a manner so that the other entries in the schedule will not be otiose. consequently, the raw-materials would be goods which would comprised in entry 27 of list ii and the manufacturing process or production would come within the ambit of expression 'industry' in entry 24 of list ii. entry 24 of list ii being subject to entry 52 of list i, when parliament makes a law in respect of an industry in exercise of its power referable to entry 52 of list i then that expression cannot be wider than the word 'industry' in entry 24 of list 2. it would, therefore, be given a restricted meaning to the expression 'industry', as was done by this court in tikaramji's case, which was followed in calcutta gas, kannan devan hills and ganga sugar corporation. according to mr. dwivedi, even in the case of b. viswanathaiah & co. v. state of karnataka manu/sc/0602/1991manu/sc/0602/1991 : [1991]1scr305 , a three judge bench of this court construed the declaration made in terms of entry 52 of list i in relation to silk industry and held that taking over the control of raw silk industry must be restricted to the aspect of production and manufacture of silk yarn or silk and did not take in the earlier stages of the industry, namely the supply of raw-materials. according to mr. dwivedi, in the aforesaid case the court unequivocally held that the declaration in section 2, which is under entry 52 of list i, do not in any way, limit the powers of the state legislature to legislate in respect of goods produced by the silk industry. the court so held being of the opinion that any wider interpretation to the expression 'industry' in entry 52 of list 1 would render entry 33 in list 3 to be otiose and meaningless. mr. dwivedi also further contended that both in indian aluminium company manu/sc/0424/1992manu/sc/0424/1992 : [1992]3scr213 : [1992]3scr213 as well s siel ltd. and ors. v. union of indian and ors. manu/sc/0601/1998manu/sc/0601/1998 : air1998sc3076 , tikaramji and calcutta gas have been followed and it has been held that the term 'industry' in entry 24 of list ii and entry 52 of list 1 could have the same meaning and it would not take within its ambit trade and commerce or production, supply and distribution of goods coming within the province of entry 26 and 27 of list ii. referring to the constitution bench decision of this court in belsund sugar mills manu/sc/0457/1999manu/sc/0457/1999 : air1999sc3125 : air1999sc3125 , mr. dwivedi submits that in the aforesaid case the court was construing the provisions in entry 28 of list ii as well as entry 33 of list iii and sugar and sugar cane having been held as food stuff coming within the ambit of entry 33 of list iii, the market committee act referable to entries 26, 27 and 28 of list ii was held to be subject to the sugar cane act. thus industry in entry 24 of list ii and entry 52 of list i would not cover the subject matter coming within the ambit of entries 26 and 27 of list ii or entry 33 of list iii. it is therefore urged, that the raw tobacco which would be a produce of agriculture and thus the raw-material for the tobacco industry, which required to be cured and processed and for such a raw-material for the tobacco industry, the parliament cannot make any legislation by making a declaration and taking over the control of tobacco industry under entry 52 of list i. tobacco, not being a food stuff, the same will also not come within the ambit of entry 33 of list iii, and therefore, the raw-tobacco would continue to be within the exclusive domain of the state legislature and state legislature would have power to make law in relation to the raw-tobacco which would be referable to entry 14 (agriculture), entries 26, 27 and 28 of list ii, as has been held by this court in the constitution bench decision in the case of belsund sugar (supra). mr. dwivedi contends that judged from this angle to the extent the tobacco board act seeks to regulate the market by providing for auction platform and by seeking to regulate growing of raw-tobacco, must be held to be beyond the competence of parliament, and on the other hand, is within the exclusive domain of the state legislature. state legislature having provided for a market where alone the trade and commerce in and the production supply and distribution of tobacco can take place, the tobacco board act would cease to operate and it is the state law which would prevail. with reference to the judgments in m.a. tulloch and baij nath kedia relied upon in the majority judgment of itc's case, mr. dwivedi contends that those decisions will have no application, inasmuch as a comparison of entry 23 of list ii and entry 54 of list i would indicate that the head of the legislation is one and the same, and entry 23 of list ii itself is subject to entry 54 of list i. necessarily, therefore, the entire field, which was there available for the state legislature to make law under entry 23 of list ii, once assumed by the parliament under entry 54 of list i, then the state legislature is denuded of its power. question of giving narrow meaning or wider meaning to the legislative entry does not arise for consideration in those cases. accordingly the majority judgment of this court committed error in construing the meaning to be given to the word 'industry' under entry 52 of list i by relying upon the decision under mining legislation, which was wholly unwarranted. mr. dwivedi urged that even the tobacco board act has not been made operative in the state of bihar and several other states, for instance, section 13 13a and 14a. this being the position, in the states where aforesaid provision had not been brought into force, there cannot be any difficulty in allowing the state act, namely, the agricultural market committee act to operate. with reference to legislative history for the expression 'industry' in entry 52 of list i, mr. dwivedi contends that the fact that a separate entry was made for regulating trade and commerce, production, supply and distribution of the products of controlled industry would suggest that the expression 'industry' in entry 52 of list i will have a restricted meaning. mr. dwivedi urged that if the contention of the appellant, that the word 'industry' in entry 52 of list i should be given a wider interpretation is correct, then the same would be destructive of the scheme pertaining to distribution of powers. mr. dwivedi refers to the judgment of this court in tikaramji as well as the judgment of full bench of allahabad high court in siel case and points out as to how the law relating to trade and commerce and production, supply and distribution of goods has been traced in these two cases and how after the end of the second world war when emergency was lifted, the power to enact on the subject was given to the central legislature by india (central government & legislature) act, 1946. mr. dwivedi urged, even through under government of india act 1935, the subject of trade, commerce, production, supply and distribution of goods was within the competence of the provincial legislature, the law was made temporarily by the central legislature. under the constitution of india, article 369 was included which empowers the parliament to make laws for 5 years with respect to trade and commerce in and the production, supply and distribution of certain specified products. that very article 369 shows that the subject matters of raw-cotton, raw-jute, cotton seed etc. would be covered by the entries in list ii and even the marginal note of article 369 throws sufficient light on the subject. by referring to articles 249 250 252 and 253, the learned counsel urged that they are special provisions which provide that in the national interest, during proclamation of emergency with the consent of two or more states parliament can make law with respect of any of the matters coming within the state list. in fact in the constituent assembly there was a heated debate in relation to article 249 and there was a strong objection to wide power being given by that article for legislation in the national interest with respect to the state list. the founding fathers apprehended that in the name of national interest the federal character of the indian polity could be completely destroyed and india could be converted into unitary state, therefore, article 249 was re-tailored and was provided for a shorter duration of operation of parliamentary law so made. mr. dwivedi urged that the term 'industry' in entry 7 of list i as well as entry 52 of list i should be confined to the process of manufacture of the industries which are declared to be necessary for the purpose of defence or for prosecution of war. according to mr. dwivedi there is no necessity or compulsion to give this entry a wider meaning merely because the war situation is being dealt with in the state entry. in such a situation entry 33 of list iii is always available to parliament for controlling products and article 250 gives over riding power to the parliament to legislate with respect to any matter enumerated in the state list during the period of proclamation of emergency. even articles 352 to 354 also confer sufficient power on the president to declare by proclamation that a grave emergency exists which can be kept alive as long as the war situation or need of defence is required. by virtue of article 353 the power of parliament would extend to making of laws with respect to a matter not enumerated in the union list, therefore the constitution makers have well thought of and designed the constitution in such a manner in the matter of distribution of power that there would be no difficulty at all for the parliament to enact any law when the country is in war, and therefore, in normal times there should be no justification to give the expression 'industry' a wider meaning and thereby denuding the state legislatures to make law on several heads of legislation enumerated in list ii. according to mr. dwivedi, reference to entry 5 of list i, in this context was wholly mis-conceived as that is a specific entry in list i with regard to arms, and as such, would not be covered under entry 27 of list ii and entry 33 of list iii. mr. dwivedi also, contended that reference to article 254(1), in this context is mis-conceived as the said article can be invoked both by the parliament and the state legislatures to make law with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the concurrent list. the expression 'repugnant' in article 254(1) refers to matter only in the concurrent list, and it is in this connection, he placed reliance on the decision of this court in the case deep chand (1959) suppl. (2) scr 8 and hoechst chemicals ( manu/sc/0392/1983manu/sc/0392/1983 : [1985]154itr64(sc) : [1985]154itr64(sc) . according to mr. dwivedi federalism having been accepted as one of the basic features of our constitution, as was held by this court in s.r. bommai manu/sc/0444/1994manu/sc/0444/1994 : [1994]2scr644 : [1994]2scr644 , a construction of a particular legislative entry which would denude another legislative body from exercising its power in respect of several heads of legislation could be held to be contrary to the basic feature of the constitution, and therefore, the court should avoid giving a wider meaning to the expression 'industry' entry 7 and entry 52 of list i as well as entry 24 of list ii. with reference to different articles of the constitution, mr. dwivedi contends that the state legislatures have exclusive power to make laws with respect to entries in the state list and only in specified contingencies parliament can legislate with respect to them. in this view of the matter counsel contends, entries in list i ought not to be construed very widely as construed by this court in itc case. the counsel says that in the state of bihar, market act in relation to tobacco is relatable to entries 26 and 27 of list ii whereas tobacco board act, enacted by the parliament includes within its fold the entire process of growing, curing and marketing of tobacco and unlike the sugar industry and purchase of sugar cane by it which was dealt with by the constitution bench in the case of tika ram ji the tobacco industry cannot be split up with reference to the raw-material. according to learned counsel growing of tobacco, its curing and marketing being one integrated industrial process the same would be embedded into tobacco industry. the very object of the tobacco board act, being to encourage export of good quality tobacco and to augment the foreign exchange reserves, the same does not seek to regulate and control the sale and purchase of tobacco in normal markets in different states. therefore trade and commerce, production, supply and distribution of tobacco in different markets in india could not be regulated by the tobacco board act. he also urged that the act in question may not be solely to the field of legislation in entry 52 of list i inasmuch as foreign exchange comes within entry 36 of list i, whereas law ensuring fair and remunerative prices for the growers and minimum prices for export of tobacco could be referable to entry 34 of list iii. this being the position, it is not possible to define the 'industry' in its widest form. further the tobacco board act being an act to regulate the sale of tobacco at auction platform, the raw-material which is produced by the growers in so far as the growing of raw-material is concerned, the same would be the matter pertaining to exclusive domain of 'agriculture' covered by entry 14 of list ii and the parliament cannot be permitted to encroach upon the domain of the state legislature. the learned counsel places reliance on the decision of this court in a.s. krishna manu/sc/0035/1956manu/sc/0035/1956 : 1957crilj409 . mr. dwivedi does not agree with the submission of the counsel appearing for the company that the tobacco industry in one comprehensive integrated industry covering within its expanse the growing of tobacco, curing, marketing and export. according to him, growing of tobacco is pure and simple agriculture and the industrial aspect beings after the industries purchase raw tobacco from the growers and begin curing the same. consequently the market acts enacted by the state legislature would be fully competent, legal and valid governing the sale and purchase of tobacco within the local market area. referring to the provisions of the bihar act, the counsel urged that the same had been enacted by the state legislature under entry 28 of list ii, the object being to provide for better regulation of buying and selling of agricultural product and the establishment of markets for agricultural produce. the comparison of the provisions of the market act and the tobacco board act would show that both the acts can operate, particularly when the tobacco board has not set up any auction platform or any kind of market center in bihar and in fact several relevant provisions like section 13 13a and 14 have not been enforced in the state of bihar. if the provision of the tobacco board act is construed in its wide meaning then the parliament must be held to have no competence to make laws in respect of anything prior to the curing of tobacco. according to the learned counsel, when this court in itc case held the state act to be invalid, it so held on the conclusion that the entire field is covered by the central legislation. but no steps having been taken by the tobacco board in the state of bihar under section 8 20 and 20a and other provisions not having been applied, it is difficult to subscribe that the entire field is covered by the tobacco act. mr. dwivedi also very seriously contended that the parliament by enacting the law under entry 52 of list i in relation to the tobacco industry and having enacted tobacco board act included the provisions of section 31, which unequivocally indicates that the act is in addition and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force. this being the position, the market act must be allowed to operate. therefore, the market committee would be entitled to levy market fee on the sale and purchase of tobacco within the market area. reliance was placed on the decisions of this court in m. karunanidhi manu/sc/0159/1979manu/sc/0159/1979 : 1979crilj773 : 1979crilj773 , chanan mal manu/sc/0073/1976manu/sc/0073/1976 : [1976]3scr688 : [1976]3scr688 and ishwari khaitan manu/sc/0069/1980manu/sc/0069/1980 : [1980]3scr331 : [1980]3scr331 . with special reference to the majority judgment of this court in itc's case the counsel urged that the aforesaid decision has not noticed several decisions of this court starting from tikaramji, calcutta gas ---etc. mr. dwivedi also contended that, as has been held by this court in several decisions, in the event of any conflict between the law made by the parliament with reference to some entry in list i and the law made by the state legislature with reference to any entry in list ii, the courts must try to harmonise and re-concile, which is well known method of construction. the majority view, however, did not examine the provisions of two acts for its conclusion as to whether both acts could be allowed to operate, whereas the judgment of hon'ble mukherjee, j proceeds on the basis that both the acts could operate in its own field. according to mr. dwivedi, the principle of occupation of field by a particular legislature is a concept relevant for interpreting an entry in the concurrent list and it will have no application when the legislation in question is under a particular entry in list i. according to mr. dwivedi, where a particular legislation made by the parliament is found to be occupying the entire field then the extent of occupation of the field would have to be examined with reference to entry 33 of list iii to find out which field remains available to the state legislature, and if, there is any repugnancy then same has to be dealt with, with reference to article 254. but the act in question not having been made (tobacco board act) with reference to entry 33 of list iii, conclusion with reference to article 254 was wholly erroneous. it is lastly urged, that the majority view in itc case not having noticed the earlier constitution bench decisions in tikaramji , calcutta gas as well as other cases following the same, the conclusion is unsustainable in law, and therefore, this constitution bench must hold that the itc case has not been correctly decided. while interpreting and considering the word 'industry' occurring in different entries of list i and list ii, it would be wholly inappropriate to refer to the meaning of the word given in encyclopedia of britannica, as was held by this court in tikaramji . it is also urged that the scope of constitutional entry in the 7th schedule can never be left to be determined on a case to case basis depending upon how much field the parliament deems fit to cover. the scope of the word 'industry' in entry 52 of list i will not expand or restrict depending upon what the parliament does in its legislation. the competence of parliamentary law can never be adjudged with reference to the nature of the law which is being enacted. the scope of the entries in list ii also cannot be determined with respect to parliamentary enactment made from time to time. on the other hand, the scope of entries have to be determined by reference to each other and by modifying one with respect to the other on the basis of the context without making any of the entries otiose. it was so held by this court in the case of mcdowell manu/sc/0427/1996manu/sc/0427/1996 : [1996]3scr721 : [1996]3scr721 . since a law made by a legislature, be it parliament or be it the state, has to be tested on the anvil of the entries in the 7th schedule of the constitution when a question of legislative competence arises, the head of the legislation in any entry cannot be differently construed. in other words, the word 'industry' occurring in entry 24 of list ii as well as entry 7 and entry 52 of list i must have the same meaning. that being the position, parliament cannot be permitted to amend industry development regulation act by including sugarcane, as has been held by this court in belsund sugar . mr. dwivedi repelled the argument of mr. shanti bhushan that the observations in tikaramji must be confined to the fact from that case on the ground that, it is no doubt true, that in tikaramji the validity of the parliamentary enactment had not been questioned, and on the other hand, it is the power of the state legislature to enact the sugarcane act, was the subject matter of consideration. but the court did examine the provisions of the state act to find out whether it encroached upon entry 52 of list i as sugar industry was a controlled industry under the provisions of idr act, 1951. that apart, the constitution bench having thoroughly gone into the constitutional history including the corresponding entries in the government of india act, and then considering a particular provision, and ultimately holding that it would not bring within its sweep the raw-materials which is the stage prior to the manufacture of industry, it is not permissible for another constitution bench to by pass the earlier constitution bench decision by limiting the ratio therein to the fact of that case, more so when the said decision had been followed later on in several other constitution bench decisions and has stood the test for last two decades. with reference to banthia's case mr. dwivedi contends that in the very same judgment the only question that cropped up for consideration is whether the goldsmith's work was a handicraft requiring application of skill and the art of making gold ornaments and was not an 'industry', within the meaning of entry 52 of list i or entry 33 of list iii of the 7th schedule, the court never examined with reference to entry 14 dealing with agricultural raw-material and in fact the court observed that it is not necessary for the purposes of this case to attempt to define the expression 'industry' precisely or to state exhaustively all the different aspects. the court was however, satisfied that the manufacture of gold ornaments by the goldsmith is a process of systematic production for trade or manufacture and, would therefore fall within the connotation of the word 'industry' in the appropriate legislative entries. thus harakchand also follows the ratio in tikaramji and not departed from the view taken in tikaramji . in hr banthia , the supreme court rejected the submission to adopt the definition of 'industry', as given in the industrial disputes act. according to mr. dwivedi, the observations of this court in harakchand and banthia cannot be utilised for the purposes of the agricultural raw-material and its production within the word 'industry' in entry 52 of list i, how so ever wide the same word may be construed. with reference to the judgment of this court in ishwari khaitan mr. dwivedi contends that the enunciation of law made therein would indicate that the court was examining to find out by virtue of law made under entry 52 of list i to what extent there has been denudation of the state legislature's power to legislate under entry 24 of list ii. the court did find that the extent of erosion is not absolute but only to the extent the control is spelled out by the parliamentary legislation. the extent of parliamentary legislation is seen only to determine how much is taken out from entry 24 of list ii and nothing more. though in this case the court relied upon the earlier decision of this court in state of west bengal v. union of india manu/sc/0086/1962manu/sc/0086/1962 : [1964]1scr371 , but unfortunately in the wet bengal case the scope of 'industry' did not fall for consideration, and that is why even tikaramji had not been referred to. but it cannot be concluded that the constitution bench was departing from tikaramji and laying down some new principles without even discussing tikaramji . mr. dwivedi submitted that in ishwari khaitan , no doubt the judgment of this court in baijnath has been relied upon but the said reference and reliance was for a different purpose and not to equate the structure of entry 52 of list i with entry 54 of list i. the court referred baijnath kedia for the limited purpose as in both cases the denudation of states' power is only to the extent of control, while baijnath dealt with entry 23 of list ii, ishwari khaitan dealt with entry 24 of list ii. the subject matter of other entries was not in issue. it would, therefore, be a fallacy to contend that ishwari khaitan relied upon baijnath kedia to hold that the entire field is occupied by the central legislation though the majority view in itc case holds so, and that must be held to be not correctly decided in view of the series of decisions starting from tikaramji , already referred to mr. dwivedi, in this connection relies upon the constitution bench decision in belsund sugar company manu/sc/0457/1999manu/sc/0457/1999 : air1999sc3125 : air1999sc3125 wherein in paragraphs 117 and 118 the cases under mines and mineral regulation and development act had been noticed and the court ultimately held that his scheme of the legislative entries is entirely different from the scheme of entry 52 of list i read with entry 24 of list ii with which the court was concerned in belsund sugar . according to mr. dwivedi the ratio in belsund sugar would support the contention on the question of competence of parliament to enact tobacco board act covering the field of growing and raw-material prior to any manufacturing process. mr. dwivedi strongly relied upon the full bench decision of allahabad high court in siel's case manu/up/0041/1996manu/up/0041/1996 : air1996all135 : air1996all135 and submitted that the full bench had considered all the relevant decisions and has come to the right conclusion. according to mr. dwivedi, tikaramji principles enunciated therein having been approved in the subsequent cases, and even in ganga sugar case hon'ble krishna iyer, j. having negatived a similar contention, as we urged in the present appeal as a desperate plea and belsund's case have approved tikaramji , irresistible conclusion would be that the majority view in itc judgment is incorrect and necessarily, therefore, the parliament did not have the legislative competence while enacting the tobacco board act after declaring tobacco industry to be taken over as a controlled industry to make any provision therein relating to growing of tobacco or sale of tobacco within the market area prior to its curing or any subsequent process of manufacturing.179. dr. a.m. singhvi, appearing for the agricultural produce market committee, munger, on an analysis of different entries made in list i, list ii and list iii of the seventh schedule submitted that there are as many as nine entries in list ii out of 66 entries which are specifically made subject to list i. 3 of the entries in list ii are subject to list iii. entry 24 of list ii however is subject to entry 52 of list i. according to the learned counsel, wherever the constitution intended that the entries in list ii were to be made subject to entries in list i, it was specifically and clearly so provided. where however an entry in list ii is not subject to list i or list iii, then the power of the state legislature to legislate with regard to that matter is supreme. the bihar agriculture markets act, being relatable to entries 14 to 28 of list ii, which is not subject to any entry either in list i or list iii, the same must be held to be supreme and there would be no fetter on the power of the state legislature to make the agricultural produce markets act. with reference to the expression "subject to list i" in mcdowell's case manu/sc/0427/1996manu/sc/0427/1996 : [1996]3scr721 : [1996]3scr721 , supreme court had itself observed that the power to make a law with respect to 'industries' lies with the states under entry 24 of list ii but the said entry is made expressly subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 in list i. if the parliament declares by law that it is expedient in the public interest to take over the control of a particular industry, then such industry gets transplanted to list i. according to the learned counsel, the industry in respect of which parliament makes a declaration contemplated under entry 52 of list i, the states are denuded of the power to make any law with respect to them under entry 24 of list ii. but making of a declaration by parliament does not have the effect of transplanting the industry from the state list to the union list. entry 52 of list i since governs only entry 24 of list ii but not other entry like entry 8, as was the case for discussion in mcdowell's case, the power of the state legislature cannot be denied to make a law referable to entry 8. this being the correct position, as enunciated by this court and the founding fathers of the constitution having taken due care by expressly stating, when a particular entry in list ii is subject to an entry in list i or list iii, thereby demarcation being made, in respect of other entries in list ii, the power of the state legislature is exclusive and, therefore, it would be prohibited field for the union to make any law. reiterating the argument advanced by mr. dwivedi, dr. singhvi also contends that the question of occupied field is only relevant in the case of laws made with reference to entries in list iii. consequently, neither entry 14 nor entry 28 being subject to any of the entries in list i, the bihar legislature was fully competent to enact the agriculture produce markets act and once in exercise of the provisions contained in the act, tobacco is notified to be one of the agricultural produce, then the power to levy fee for sale for purchase of tobacco within the market area cannot be whittled down by the central legislation. according to dr. singhvi, the central legislation to that extent must be held to be invalid. the learned counsel further urged that in case of a seeming conflict of entries of two lists, the entries should be read together without giving a narrow or restrictive sense to either of them and every attempt should be made to see whether the two entries can be reconciled or harmonized. this approach to the interpretation is necessary to uphold and promote the "federal structure" of the constitution which is a basic structure, as held by this court in s.r. bommani v. union of india manu/sc/0444/1994manu/sc/0444/1994 : [1994]2scr644 . the fundamental feature of federalism being that within each list each legislature is supreme. there can be no repugnancy between the matters in list i and list ii and repugnancy can only be a concept peculiar to list iii. it is no doubt true that entry 52 of list i over rides only entry 24 of list ii and no other entry under list ii. it has been held by this court in bihar distillery 1999 (2) scc 727 and dalmia industry manu/sc/0446/1994manu/sc/0446/1994 : [1994]1scr798 : [1994]1scr798 that trade, commerce, production, distribution of products of alcohol industry can be regulated both by the center and the state. bihar agriculture produce markets act being relatable to entry 14 and 28 of list ii, that act must operate on its own and not being affected by law made by parliament under entry 52 of list i. in this connection, the learned counsel refers to the judgment of this court in belsund manu/sc/0457/1999manu/sc/0457/1999 : air1999sc3125 : air1999sc3125 . according to dr. singhvi, the tobacco act by providing section 31 indicates the intention of the parliament that the act would not govern the entire field in exclusion to all other acts in existence. in this view of the matter, there cannot be any justification in denying the market committee to levy market fee in respect of the sale and purchase of tobacco within the market area as the market committee act is a duly enacted law by the state legislature within its competence to legislate under entry 14 and 28. dr. singhvi also urged that mere declaration under entry 52 is not enough but the law in question must be found which actually occupied the field. dr. singhvi urged that mere existence of power is not enough but the power must be exercised and on account of such exercise, the field must be occupied so as to hold that the central law would collide with the state law. it was so held in belsund manu/sc/0457/1999manu/sc/0457/1999 : air1999sc3125 : air1999sc3125 with regard to tea. to the same effect is the ratio in the case of western coal fields manu/sc/0244/1982manu/sc/0244/1982 : [1982]2scr1 : [1982]2scr1 and fateh chand 1977 (2) scc 677. according to the learned counsel in the case in hand, there is no question of conflict or repugnancy between the tobacco act and the bihar act since both acts operate in mutually exclusive and different field and therefore, the majority judgment in itc case would not apply to the bihar agricultural produce act dr. singhvi also made an extreme argument to the effect that even if the central legislation is construed to occupy the entire filed under list i, yet the state act can still be operative and market fee could be levied by the market committee under the state act for services provided by it on the principle of quid pro quo. it is in this connection, he placed reliance on the decision in synthetics and chemicals jt 1989(4)sc 467. according to dr. singhvi, the expression "industry" both under entry 24 of list ii and entry 52 of list i would not cover subject matters which are mentioned sui generis in different entries and separately from entry 24 of list ii. if a wide meaning to the expression is given, it would run counter to the scheme of distribution of powers and the structural inter-relationship between entry 52 of list i and entries 24, 26 and 27 of list ii and entry 33 of list iii and would make the state list redundant qua that industry. in this view of the matter, the counsel urged that the decisions relating to mines and minerals would not be relevant because of inter-relationship of entry 23 of list ii and entry 54 of list i. once the declaration is made by parliament in terms of entry 54 of list i, then both mines and its product minerals get extracted from the state list and get submerged in the entry 54 of list i but that would not be the case when the power under entry 52 of list i and entry 24 of list ii as well as other relevant entry in list ii are considered. consequently, the majority view in itc case must be over-ruled.180. mr. g.l. sanghi, the learned senior counsel, appearing for mandi samiti in madhya pradesh batch of appeals, submitted that in the case in hand, relevant enquiry should be whether the state act is within the exclusive subject matter of the state legislature under entry 28 of list ii. according to him, there is no irreconcilable clash between the two acts, which is also apparent from the mandate of section 31 of the central act. the object and purpose of the state act being establishment of market places and the same object having been achieved by the various provisions providing for large scale infrastructural establishment and provision of a large variety of services, the state act rightly requires those who avail these services to pay the requisite market fee and also in order to provide for appropriate control, to take licenses wherever a market functionary desires to function within the market bard or market area. the provisions of tobacco board act, more specifically section 8 however mandates that the board has to apply its mind to provide appropriate measures including the measure of setting up an auction platform and since the auction platform has to have a location, the board cannot but think it fit to establish such platform within the market area. such a step will be consistent with the mandate of section 31 and, therefore, it will not be in derogation of the state act. the amendment introduced in tobacco board act, according to mr. sanghi is achieved by the enforcement of the amending act which exhausts itself by merely introducing the amending provisions into the parent act so that the requirement of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the parent act, namely bringing into force the newly added sections will have to be complied with. thus the amended sections as well as section 13 of the act having not been enforced within the state of madhya pradesh, there cannot be any inconsistency or repugnancy between the two acts assuming that bringing into force all the said sections may create some inconsistency. according to mr. sanghi, the objects of the tobacco board act being development of tobacco industry, more particularly in respect of virginia tobacco, is not in any manner defeated by the provisions of the state act and the object of the state act are not defeated by the existing or even non-enforced provisions of the tobacco board act. in this view of the matter, according to mr. sanghi, the minority view in itc case must be held to be correct and both the central act and the state act should be permitted to operate in their own sphere.181 mr. a.k. ganguli, the learned senior counsel, appearing for the tamil nadu agricultural marketing board, analysed the provisions of article 246(3) of the constitution and contended that the expression "subject to" appearing in article 246(3) has reference to those entries in list ii which provides that the subject matter of said entries are subject to the provisions contained in certain specified entries appearing in either list i or list iii as for example entry 2 in list ii provides police (including railways and village police) subject to the provisions of entry 2a of list i. similar provisions are found in several entries. in list ii like entry 17, 22, 24, 26, 27, 32, 33, 37, 54, 57 and 63 but only three entries in list ii namely entries 13, 23 and 50 do not specify any entry in list i or list iii subject to which the said entries would remain operative but restrict the scope of these entries by a general reference to the provisions contained in list i or list iii. therefore, in respect of all other entries in list ii, the state legislature enjoys the exclusive power to enact laws and consequently, if the state act has been enacted under entry 28 of list ii, the state act must be allowed to operate. the contention that parliament enjoys superior legislative powers with regard to subject matters enumerated in list ii, according to mr. ganguli, would hold good only in respect of those entries in list ii which expressly provide that the subject matter thereof are subject to the matters dealt with in various entries in list i. but that principle cannot be extended to the subject matters covered by other entries in list ii. placing reliance on the provision of section 100 of the government of india act, 1935 which corresponds to article 246 of the constitution which was interpreted by sulaiman, j in subrahmanyam chettiyar v. muttuswamy grounder, reported in 1940 fcr 188, which has been approved by the constitution bench in the case of kseb v. indal manu/sc/0311/1975manu/sc/0311/1975 : [1976]1scr552 , the counsel urged that the state legislature enjoys exclusive legislative power under article 246(3) to make laws with respect to the subject matter enumerated in entry 28 of list ii i.e. "market and fairs". this power has not been conditioned by any restrictions in so far as the distribution of legislative power between the parliament and the state legislature is concerned and consequently, this power cannot be curtailed or restricted by the exercise of legislative power of the parliament with reference to any of the entries either in list i or list iii. mr. ganguli further contends that the entry in three lists of the constitution are not powers but fields of legislation. the power to legislate is given by article 246. the entries in different lists demarcate the area over which the appropriate legislature can operate. according to him, the concept of federal supremacy can not be invoked to deny the state legislature the power to make laws with respect to such subject matters, which are exclusively assigned to it under the state list. if a law made by the state legislature is impugned on the ground of incompetency and on examination of the law, it is found that the law in substance is with respect to a matter in list ii, then the law would be valid in its entirety. it is only in case of a seeming conflict between the law made under any of the entries in list i and ii, then the principle of federal supremacy could be invoked in view of the opening words in article 246(1). so far as the meaning of the expression "industry" in entry 52 of list i, the counsel urged that the said word must have the same meaning as would be ascribed to the word in entry 24 of list ii. so far as the raw materials are concerned, it has been held to be goods and would fall within the subject matter comprised in entry 27 of list ii. the products of the industry would also be comprised in entry 27 of list ii except that in the case of controlled industry, they would fall under entry 33 of list iii and only the process of manufacture and production would fall under entry 24 of list ii and if the concerned industry is a declared industry, then the process of manufacture and production would fall under entry 52 of list i. it is, therefore, logical to hold that the activities relating to production and manufacture which would otherwise come within the purview of the expression "industry" in entry 24 of list ii becomes a subject matter of legislation under entry 52 of list i, where the industry is a declared industry. therefore, such legislative competence of the parliament would not confer power in relation to raw materials which may be an integral part of the industrial process and thereby denuding the state legislature of its power to make laws with respect to subject matters covered by either entries in list ii. mr. ganguli contends that this court has consistently taken the view that the subject matter of entry 52 of list i pertains to manufacture and production activities and therefore, it would not be appropriate that the word "industry" should have a wider meaning so as to include also the raw materials within the same. with reference to the decisions of this court in relation to law made by the parliament, regulating the mines and minerals development, mr. ganguli contends that the subject matter of entry 54 of list i is the same as in entry 23 of list ii and entry 23 of list ii further provides that it should be further subject to the provisions of list i with respect to regulation and development under the control of the union. in such a case, therefore, once the parliament makes a declaration in section 2 of the mines and minerals development and regulation act, then all aspects of regulations and minerals development even including taxes on minerals are covered by the said declaration and, therefore, the state legislature is denuded of its power to make laws with reference to the subject matter. this has been so held in baij nath kedia v. state of bihar manu/sc/0352/1969manu/sc/0352/1969 : [1970]2scr100 , state of orissa v. m.a. tulloch manu/sc/0021/1963manu/sc/0021/1963 : [1964]4scr461 , india cement v. state of tamil nadu manu/sc/0019/1990manu/sc/0019/1990 and orissa cement ltd. v. state of orissa & ors. manu/sc/0381/1991manu/sc/0381/1991 : [1991]2scr105 . but the subject matter of entry 52 of list i and the subject matter comprised in entry 24 of list ii both relate to industry and entry 24 of list ii is subject to entry 7 and 52 of list i. the state legislature could not have made a law in exercise of power under entry 24 of list ii so as to make other entries redundant. according to mr. ganguli, the expression "industry" cannot have a wider meaning. on the question of repugnancy, mr. ganguli contends that the said question arises only when both legislatures are competent to enact the respective laws and the two laws cover the same field. if the two laws are found to be operating in the same field and are also found to be inconsistent with each other, only then the law made by the parliament would prevail. but that would apply only when the law made by the parliament and state legislature are both in respect of the same subject matter, enumerated in the concurrent list, as was held in hoechest pharmaceutical manu/sc/0392/1983manu/sc/0392/1983 : [1985]154itr64(sc) : [1985]154itr64(sc) . even in deep chand's case the two sets of laws made by the state legislature and the parliament with respect to the same subject matter enumerated in entry 35 of list iii, was under consideration and the court was examining the question of repugnancy. but that will have no application to the question involved in the present case inasmuch as the state act falls within the subject matter comprised under entry 28 of list ii in respect of which the state legislature enjoys the exclusive power to make laws. on an analysis of the provisions of tobacco board act and section 31 thereof, mr. ganguli contends that the provisions of tobacco act would operate only in addition to other laws and, therefore that act cannot be pressed into service to give an over-riding effect over other legislation including the agricultural produce markets act, which has been enacted by the competent state legislature. according to the learned counsel the two act over-lap only as regards sale and purchase of tobacco within the notified area and if auction platform registered with board are held within the market area, then the so called conflict in the two acts can be easily avoided and both acts would be allowed to operate. while market committee would be entitled to levy fees in respect of sale and purchase of tobacco in the market area for the services rendered including the entire infrastructure, the tobacco board act can yet levy fee as provided under tobacco board act, which would be a separate fee for special services rendered by it, as determined by the central government under section 14a and according to the learned counsel, this is the only harmonious construction which should be and ought to be made of the two provisions. according to mr. ganguli, the majority decisions in itc case are in conflict with tika ram v. state of u.p. manu/sc/0008/1956manu/sc/0008/1956 : [1956]1scr393 , calcutta gas manu/sc/0105/1961manu/sc/0105/1961 : 1962 supp. scr 1, kannan devan hills manu/sc/0543/1972manu/sc/0543/1972 : [1973]1scr356 : [1973]1scr356 , ganga sugar manu/sc/0397/1979manu/sc/0397/1979 : [1980]1scr769 : [1980]1scr769 , b. viswanathan manu/sc/0602/1991manu/sc/0602/1991 : [1991]1scr305 : [1991]1scr305 , and therefore, the said decisions must be held to be erroneous. in fact the minority view expressed by justice mukherjee, looking at the object of two act, allowing both the act to operate in their respective fields should be upheld. mr. ganguli contended that though the competence of the parliament to make tobacco board act covering the field exclusively within the competence of the state legislature, had not been assailed in any of these writ petitions, but in view of the nature of controversy that has arisen and the arguments advanced in the case leaves no room for doubt that each of the parties including the central government as well as the tobacco board had the opportunity of placing its case and, therefore there should be no fetter on the power of the court to decide the legislative competence of the parliament in the case in hand.182. mr. malhotra, the learned senior counsel, appearing for the tobacco board though initially proceeded with the arguments that both acts could be reconciled but later on categorically submitted that the central legislation must prevail. according to him the tobacco industry got lifted from entry 24 of list ii to entry 52 of list i and the same must be held to be a special act dealing with tobacco industry right from the stage of growing till it is exported. this being a special act and the market and fairs under entry 28 being a general entry and agriculture under entry 14 of list ii being a general entry, the special act enacted by the parliament must prevail and there is no question of lack of competence of the parliament to enact the law. in support of this contention reliance was placed on the constitution bench decision of this court in belsund sugar company limited manu/sc/0457/1999manu/sc/0457/1999 : air1999sc3125 : air1999sc3125 . mr. malhotra relied upon several decisions of the federal court and this court and contended that entries in the schedule must be given its widest meaning and it would not be a correct approach to give a restricted meaning to the subject matter of legislation described in an entry. in support of this contention, he placed reliance on the decision of the federal court in the united provinces v. atiqa begum and ors. 1940 (2) fcr110, the first additional income-tax officer, mysore v. h.n.s. iyengar - manu/sc/0200/1961manu/sc/0200/1961 : [1962]44itr437(sc) , chaturbhai m. patel v. the union of india and ors. manu/sc/0012/1959manu/sc/0012/1959 : 1978(2)elt297(sc) , navinchandra mafatlal v. the commissioner of income tax, bombay city - manu/sc/0070/1954manu/sc/0070/1954 : [1954]26itr758(sc) and zaverbhai amaidas v. the state of bombay - manu/sc/0040/1954manu/sc/0040/1954 : [1955]1scr799 . the learned counsel also contended that it is a cardinal rule of interpretation that words in an entry should be given their ordinary, natural and grammatical meaning subject to the rider that legislative entries are required to be interpreted broadly and widely so as to give powers to the legislatures to enact the law with respect to the matters enumerated in the legislative entries. he places reliance on the decision of this court in r.s. rekhchand mohota, manu/sc/0674/1997manu/sc/0674/1997 : air1997sc2591 : air1997sc2591 , rai ramkrishna and ors. v. the state of bihar - manu/sc/0031/1963manu/sc/0031/1963 : [1963]50itr171(sc) and indian aluminium company and ors. v. state of kerala and ors. manu/sc/0370/1996manu/sc/0370/1996 : [1996]2scr23 . he also referred to the case of harakchand ratanchand banthia manu/sc/0038/1969manu/sc/0038/1969 : [1970]1scr479 : [1970]1scr479 , which had been relied upon by mr. shanti bhushan in his arguments. mr. malhotra contends that the majority decision in itc case, therefore, must be held to be correct.183. the learned additional solicitor general mr. trivedi appearing for the attorney general of india placed before us the process of manufacture of tobacco and indicated how tobacco is grown commercially. to emphasise on the issue he contended that the tobacco industry having been notified to be a 'controlled industry' it will be a disaster if the parliament is held to have no competence to make law in relation to growing of tobacco or processing of raw tobacco. according to the learned additional solicitor general the trade and commerce in product of control industry being covered by entry 33 of list i, the legislative power of the state is subordinate to the power of the parliament in respect of list iii. he further contended that the constitution itself has specifically put down entries in list ii in which the power is expressed in general terms but is made subject to the provisions of entries in either list i or list iii. consequently, no anomaly will arise in holding exclusive power with the parliament in respect of the subject coming under any entry in list i. he further contended that tobacco board act covers the entire field of tobacco industry and is within the competence of parliament under entry 52 of list i. tikaramji was a case which concerned only with a part of the industry namely manufacture of sugar. the observations made in tikaramji manu/sc/0008/1956manu/sc/0008/1956 : [1956]1scr393 were in the background of that case, as in that case the court was concerned with the entire process as in the present case. according to the learned additional solicitor general, it was not necessary for the court to examine the ambit of the expression "industry" in entry 52 of list i. if the ordinary principle of construction of an entry in the legislative list is that the entry should be given wide meaning as has been held in several cases of this court, there is no reason why on the basis of the said observations made in tikaramji, the court would give a limited meaning to the expression "industry" in entry 24 of list ii and entry 52 of list i. with reference to the judgment of this court in h.r. banthia manu/sc/0038/1969manu/sc/0038/1969 : [1970]1scr479 : [1970]1scr479 , the learned additional solicitor general stated that for the purposes of that case, it was not necessary for the court to make an attempt to define the expression "industry". the court was merely concerned with the question whether manufacture of gold ornaments would be a process of systematic product, so as to fall within the expression "industry" in the appropriate legislative entry. the court did come to that conclusion. the learned additional solicitor general also contended the case of harakchand manu/sc/0038/1969manu/sc/0038/1969 : [1970]1scr479 : [1970]1scr479 is in consonance with the principle of interpretation of an entry and should be applied to the case in hand. the learned addl. solicitor general contends that the constitution being an organic document, has to be interpreted in its widest amplitude. according to the learned addl. solicitor general the majority decision in itc case must be held to be the correct law. the counsel states that the validity of the tobacco board act was also not under challenge in the itc case which stood disposed of by the judgment of this court since reported in manu/sc/0007/1985manu/sc/0007/1985 and, therefore, it would not be appropriate for this court to examine the legislative competence of the parliament in relation to the enactment of the tobacco board act.184. though several counsel have raised contentions in different forms as indicated earlier, but essentially the following questions arise for our determination:-1. whether the tobacco board act enacted by the parliament under entry 52 of list i can be held to be constitutionally valid and within the legislative competence of the parliament, so far as the provisions contained in the same in relation to the growing of tobacco and sale of raw-materials, and this in turn would depend upon the question whether the word 'industry' used in entry 52 of list i should be given a restricted meaning;2. even if the tobacco board act is held to be constitutionally valid and the agricultural produce market act is also held to be constitutionally valid and within the powers of the state legislature, so far as purchase and sale of tobacco within the market area is concerned, whether both the acts can be allowed to operate, as was held by the minority judgment in itc case;3. if there is a repugnancy between the two then whether the central act would prevail, as was held by the majority judgment in itc case.185. but before considering several elaborate arguments advanced on these issues, it may be noticed that the constitution of india itself defines the political authority, locates the sources of political power and also indicates how the power has to be exercised setting out the limits on its own use. the rules relating to the distribution of legislative power by providing the legislative heads for the parliament to make law in respect of subjects enumerated in list i, and similarly enumerating the subjects in list ii with respect to which the state legislature can frame law, in fact constitutes the heart of the federal scheme of the constitution. but the constitution makers having found that the need for power sharing devices between the central and the state must be subordinated to the imperatives of the state's security and stability propelled the thrust towards centralization and by using non obstante clause under article 246 the federal supremacy is achieved. article 246 of the constitution deals with the distribution of legislative powers as between the union and the state legislature, with reference to the different lists in the 7th schedule. the various entries in 3 lists of the 7th schedule are not powers of legislation but the fields of legislation. the entry in the list and legislative heads and are of enabling character. they are designed to define and limit the respective areas of legislative competence of the union and the state legislature. it is a well recognised principle that the language of entry should be given a widest scope and each general word should be interpreted to extend to all ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably be comprehended in it. the entries in the lists should be read together without giving a narrow or restricted meaning to any of them. powers of the union and the state legislatures are both expressed in precise and in definite terms and, therefore, there can be no reason in such a case in giving broader interpretation to one rather than to the other. it is only when an apparent overlapping occurs the doctrine of 'pith and substance' has to be applied to find out the true nature of legislation and the entry within which it would fall. when different entries in the same list crop up for consideration the usual principle followed is that each particular entry should relate to a separate subject or group of subjects and every attempt should be made to harmonise different entries and to discard a construction which will render any of the entries ineffective.186. coming to the case in hand, the relevant entries which arise for our consideration are entries 52 of list i, entry 24 of list ii and entry 28 of list 2. under entry 52 of list 1 tobacco board act has been enacted by parliament and under entry 28 of list ii the agricultural produce market act has been framed by the state legislature. incidentally, also entry 7 of list 1 and entries 14 and 27 of list 2 crop up for consideration. it would, therefore, be appropriate to indicate those entries hereunder:"list - ientry 7 - industries declared by parliament by law to be necessary for the purpose of defence or for the prosecution of war.entry 52 - industries, the control of which by the union is declared by parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.list - iientry 24 - industries subject to the provisions of (entries 7 and 52) of list i.entry 27 - production supply and distribution of goods subject to the provisions of entry 33 of list iii; andentry 28 - markets and fairs."187. though the state legislature has power to make law in relation to any industry under entry 24 of list ii, but the said entry itself being subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of list i, once parliament makes a declaration by law identifying an industry, the control of which is taken over by the union in the public interest, then the state legislature is denuded of its competence to make any law in respect of that industry, notwithstanding its competence under entry 24 of list ii. the industry in question having been identified and necessary declaration to that effect being made in terms of entry 52 of list i then over that subject the parliament gets exclusive power to make laws under article 246(1) of the constitution. the tobacco board act having been enacted by the parliament under article 246(1) of the constitution and the law in question being referable to entry 52 of list i, the moot question that arises for adjudication is, what is the extent and ambit of the expression 'industry' used in entry 52. as has been stated earlier, the expression 'industry' has been used in entry 24 of list ii and entry 7 and entry 52 of list i. in deciding the legislative competence of the parliament in enacting tobacco board act and in making provision therein in relation to the growing of tobacco as well as sale of tobacco in the places specified therein, and on terms and conditions mentioned therein, the moot question is whether the word 'industry' would be given a wide meaning so as to bring within its ambit all that is necessary for the industry, including the raw material as well as the growing of the raw material, as contended by mr. shanti bhushan, or a restricted meaning would be given to the same on the basis of the observations made by this court in tikaramji's case and followed in several other authorities, as contended by mr. dwivedi. in the majority judgment of this court in itc case manu/sc/0007/1985manu/sc/0007/1985 : (1985) supp. 1 scr 145, the majority view expressed by hon'ble fazal ali, j. came to hold that the center having taken over an industry under entry 52 of list i and having passed the act to regulate the legislation, and the said legislation having covered the entire field, the state legislatures ceases to have any jurisdiction to legislate in that field, and if it does so, then the state legislation would be ultra vires of the powers of the state legislature. even the minority view expressed by hon'ble justice sabyasachi mukherjee also accepts the recognised principle of parliamentary supremacy in the field of legislation engrafted in article 246. the learned judge also held that the words in a constitutional document conferring legislative powers should be construed most liberally and in their widest amplitude, following the judgment of this court in navin chandra v. cit, bombay manu/sc/0070/1954manu/sc/0070/1954 : [1954]26itr758(sc) . the minority view also was not to the effect that the tobacco board act was beyond the legislative competence of the parliament. on the other hand having held the tobacco board act to be constitutionally valid and the agricultural market act enacted by the state legislature to be a valid piece of legislation, the learned judge came to hold that the said act essentially dealing with the object to regulate marketing of agricultural produce and the control of coffee (for tobacco) industry would not be defeated if the marketing of coffee (for tobacco) is done within the provisions of marketing act, the state legislatures' power to make marketing act ought not to be denuded and one must avoid corroding the state's ambit of power of legislation which will ultimately lead to erosion of india being a union of states. the minority view appears to have been influenced by the fact that the states must have the power to raise and mobilize resources in their exclusive fields. thus all the three learned judges did not doubt the competence of the parliament to enact tobacco board act. while the majority view was to the effect that the marketing act will not operate so far as dealing with the sale and purchase of tobacco within the market area, as the field is fully occupied by the central act, namely, the tobacco board act, the minority view proceeded on a finding that both acts can be permitted to operate in their respective sphere.188. in the constitution bench decision of this court in harakchand ratanchand banthia and ors. etc. v. union of india and ors. manu/sc/0038/1969manu/sc/0038/1969 : [1970]1scr479 , the legislative competence of the parliament under entry 52 of list i came up for consideration, while dealing with validity of the provisions of the gold control act, which act included within its ambit the gold ornaments. one of the contention that had been advanced was that the goldsmith's work was handicraft, requiring application of skills and the art of making gold ornaments was not an 'industry' within the meaning of entry 52 of list i. it had been contended on behalf of the union government that the legislative entry must be construed in a large and liberal sense and goldsmith's craft was an industry within the meaning of entry 24 of list ii as well as entry 52 of list i and therefore, parliament was competent to legislate in regard to the manufacture of gold ornaments. having considered the relevant entries namely entry 52 of list i and entry 24 and 27 of list ii, the constitution bench had observed that - "it is well established that the widest amplitude should be given to the language of the entries". the court in that case did not think it necessary to attempt to define the expression "industry" precisely or to state exhaustively of its different aspects but considered the question whether the manufacture of gold ornaments by goldsmith in india falls within the connotation of the word "industry" in the appropriate legislative entries. the court unequivocally rejected the contention raised by mr. daphtary that if the process of production was to constitute "industry" a process of machinery or mechanical contrivance was essential, as in the opinion of the court there is no reason why such a limitation should be imposed on the meaning of the word "industry" in the legislative lists. the court also rejected the argument advanced on behalf of mr. palkhivala that manufacture of gold ornaments was not an industry because it required application of individual art and craftsmanship, as in the opinion of the court mere use of the skill or art is not a decisive factor and it was held that the said factor will not take the manufacture of gold ornaments out of the ambit of the relevant legislative entries. it is in this connection, the court observed :"it is well settled that the entries in the three lists are only legislative heads or fields of legislation and they demarcate the area over which the appropriate legislature can operate. the legislative entries must be given a large and liberal interpretation, the reason being that the allocation of subjects to the lists is not by way of scientific or logical definition but is a mere enumeration of broad and comprehensive categories."189. the court ultimately came to the conclusion that the manufacture of gold ornaments by goldsmith in india is a process of systematic production for trade or manufacture and so falls within the connotation of the word "industry" in the appropriate legislative entries. at page 490 of the aforesaid judgment, while construing as to what is the meaning of the word "industry" in entry 52 of list i and entry 24 of list ii, it referred to the definition of "industry" in shorter oxford english dictionary as well as the meaning of the said word in webster's third new international dictionary and the contention raised on behalf of the applicant that if the word "industry" is construed in this wide sense, then entry 27 of list ii will lose all meanings and contents, was not accepted by the court. it is, thus clear that the court did apply the theory that widest amplitude and meaning should be given to the entries in the legislative lists. further the contention of the applicant that the legislation in fact is a legislation under entry 27 of list ii, dealing with "production, supply and distribution of goods" and being a special entry, the contents of entry should be excluded from the expression "industry" in entry 52, was not accepted and rejected.190. in chaturbhai m. patel v. union of india manu/sc/0012/1959manu/sc/0012/1959 : 1978(2)elt297(sc) , a constitution bench of this court was construing the entries under the government of india act, 1935 and one of the contention raised in that case was sections 6 and 8 of the central excise & salt act, 1944 and the rules made thereunder were beyond the legislative competence of the central legislature. the relevant entries which came up for consideration in that case were entry 45 of list i and entries 27 and 29 of the state list, which are as under:-"45. duties of excise on tobacco and other goods manufactured or produced in india except:-(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption(b) opium, indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics, non-narcotic drugs;(c) medical and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any substance included in sub-paragraph (b) of this entry.item 27. trade and commerce within the province; markets and fairs, money lending and money lenders."item 29. production, supply and distribution of goods; development of industries, subject to the provisions in list i with respect to the development of certain industries under federal control."191. a bare look at those entries and on being compared with the entries in list ii of the seventh schedule of the constitution of india, it appears that entry 27 of the state list under the government of india act now comprises of entries 26 and 28 of list ii of the seventh schedule and entry 29 of the state list in the government of india act is now combined in entry 27 of the state list relating to production, supply and distribution of goods and also entry 24 of list ii namely development of industries. in the aforesaid constitution bench decision, a passage from the judgment of the federal court reported in manu/fe/0004/1940manu/fe/0004/1940 : (1940) f.c.r. 188 was quoted, which may be extracted hereunder:"it must inevitably happen from time to time that legislation, though purporting to deal with a subject in one list, touches also on a subject in another list, and the different provisions of the enactment may be so closely intertwined that blind adherence to a strictly verbal interpretation would result in a large number of statutes being declared invalid because the legislature enacting them may appear to have legislated in a forbidden sphere."192. the constitution bench approved the aforesaid if judgment of the federal court and referring to the judgment of this court in the state of rajasthan v. g. chawla manu/sc/0141/1958manu/sc/0141/1958 : 1959crilj660 , the court held."it is equally well-settled that the power to legislate e on a topic of legislation carries with it the power to legislate on an ancillary matter which can be said to be reasonably included in the power given."193. the court ultimately held that the federal legislature did have the competence to make provisions in sections 6 and 8 of the central excise & salt act under entry 45 of list of the government of india act, 1935 and observed thus:"it is within the competence of the central legislation to provide for matter which may otherwise fall within the competence of the provincial legislature if they are necessarily incidental to effective legislation by the central legislature on a subject of legislation expressly within its power."194. this indicates that the court has all along been construing a particular legislative entry to give wide connotation possible and in that case, it was held while legislating upon an industry, parliament would be entitled to legislate also on the raw materials of that industry which is an ancillary to the industry and there should not be any limitation in interpreting the expression "industry" to denude the power of the parliament and thereby make the law ineffective. in the aforesaid judgment of this court, it has been held:"looking at the scheme of the act, its object and purpose its true nature and character and the pith and substance the conclusion in inevitable that the act was within the legislative competence of the central legislature and although there may be certain matters otherwise within the legislative competence of the provincial legislature they are necessarily incidental to effective legislation by the central legislature. the various provisions of the act and the rule made thereunder were, in our opinion, essentially connected with the levying & collection of excise duty and in its true nature and character the act remains one that falls under item 45 of list i and the incidental trenching upon the provincial filed of items 27 or 29 would not affect its constitutionality because the extend of invasion of the provincial filed may be a circumstances to determine the true pith and substance but once that question is determined the act, in our opinion, would fall on the side of the central field and not that of the provincial field."195. in synthetics and chemicals ltd. and ors. v. state of u.p. and ors. manu/sc/0336/1990manu/sc/0336/1990, it was held that the constitution must not be construed in any narrow or pedantic sense and that construction which is most beneficial to the widest possible amplitude of its power must be adopted. in the said case, after noticing the principle of construction in relation to a constitutional provisions, providing division of power and jurisdiction in federal constitutional scheme, it was held:"it is well settled that widest amplitude should be given to the language of the entries in three lists but some of these entries in different lists or in the same list may override and sometimes may appears to be in direct conflict with each other, then and then only comes the duty of the court to find the true intent and purpose and to examine the particular legislation in question. each general word should be held to extend to all ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably be comprehended in it. in interpreting an entry it would not be reasonable to import any limitation by comparing or contrasting that entry with any other in the same list."196. in express hotels private ltd. v. state of gujarat and anr. manu/sc/0179/1989manu/sc/0179/1989 : [1989]178itr151(sc) . the court was no doubt interpreting some entries providing for taxes on luxuries but dealing with the general principles of an entry in a legislative list, the court held:"we are dealing with an entry in a legislative list. the entries should not be read in a narrow or pedantic sense but must be given their fullest meaning and the widest amplitude and be held to extend to all ancillary and subsidiary matters, which can fairly and reasonably be said to be comprehended in them."197. as has been stated earlier, even in his minority judgment in itc case, justice mukherjee had observed:"it is well settled that the cardinal rule of interpretation is that the words should be read in their ordinary natural and grammatical meaning. but words in a constitutional document conferring legislative powers should also be construed most liberally and in their widest amplitude."198. in view of the aforesaid rules of interpretation as well as the constitution bench decision referred to above, it is difficult for us to accept the contention of mr. dwivedi that the word "industry" in entry 52 of list i should be given a restricted meaning, so as to exclude from its purview the subject of legislation coming within entry 27 or entry 14 of list ii. bearing in mind the constitutional scheme of supremacy of parliament, the normal rule of interpretation of an entry in any of the list in the seventh schedule of the constitution, the object of taking over the control of the tobacco industry by the parliament, on making a declaration as required under entry 52 of list i and on examining the different provisions of the tobacco board act, we see no justification for giving a restricted meaning to the expression "industry' in entry 52 of list i, nor do we find any justification in the contention of the counsel appearing for the states and also different market committees that the provisions contained in tobacco board act dealing with the growing of tobacco as well as making provisions for sale and purchase of tobacco, must be held to be beyond the legislative competence of the parliament, as it does not come within the so-called narrow meaning of the expression "industry" on the ground that otherwise it would denude the state legislature of its power to make law dealing with market under entry 28, dealing with agriculture under entry 14 and dealing with goods under entry 27 of list ii. such an approach of interpretation in our considered opinion would be against the very scheme of the constitution and supremacy of the parliament and such an approach towards interpreting the power sharing devices in relation to entries in list i and list ii would be against the thrust towards centralization. in our considered opinion, therefore, the word "industry' in entry 52 of list i should not be given any restricted meaning and should be interpreted in a manner so as to enabling the parliament to make law in r elation to subject matter which is declared and whose control has been taken over to bring within its sweep any ancillary matter, which can be said to be reasonably included within the power and which may be incidental to the subject of legislation so that the parliament would be able to make an effective law. so constructed and on examining different provisions of the tobacco board act, we do not find any lack of legislative competence with the parliament so as to enact any of the provisions contained in the said act, the act in question having been enacted by the parliament on a declaration being made of taking over of the control of the tobacco industry by the union and the act the intended for the development of the said industry.199. the main prop of the argument advanced by mr. dwivedi is the decision of this court in tikaramji which was followed in calcutta gas, kanandevan and ganga sugar corporation, all of which are constitution bench decisions. in tikaramji, no doubt the constitution bench of this court held that the raw materials which are integral part of the industrial process, cannot be included in the process of manufacture or production and thus "industry" within the meaning of entry 52 of list i under which the parliament makes a law, would not bring within its sweep the raw materials. the aforesaid observations had been made in connection with sugar industry and sugar-cane. according to mr. dwivedi, the majority decision in itc case, cannot be sustained, since the earlier constitution bench decision of this court in tikaramji, calcutta, gas, kanandevan and ganga sugar corporation have not noticed. mr. dwivedi's further contention is that a legislative entry in any list should be so interpreted so as not to denude another entry in the same list or in any other list and, therefore, it is necessary to give a restricted meaning to the expression "industry" occurring in entry 24 of list 2 as well as entry 52 of list 1. according to mr. divedi, while examining the constitutionality of the market committee act referable to entries 26, 27 and 28 of list ii vis-a-vis the sugar-cane act referable to entry 33 of list iii in belsund sugar, this court has held that the market committee act should be subject to sugarcane act. applying the same principle, it would be logical to hold that the raw tobacco, which would be a produce of agriculture and consequently a raw material for the tobacco industry would continue to be with in the exclusive domain of the state legislature and the parliament is incompetent to make any legislation in relation to either growing to tobacco or sale and purchase to tobacco. it would therefore, be necessary to examine what really this court in tikaramji has held. at the outset, it may by noticed that in none of these cases, relied upon by mr. dwivedi, namely tikaramji, calcutta gas, kanandevan and ganga sugar, the competence of parliament to make any law referable to entry 52 of list i had not been questioned. in tikaramji, the question for consideration was whether the at passed by the state legislature and notification issued thereunder is repugnant to the parliament act and notification issued thereunder. on examining the provisions of the state act namely the sugarcane act, the court held that the said law concerns solely with the regulation of supply and purchase of sugarcane and in no way trenched upon the jurisdiction of the center with regard to sugar and on scrutiny of section 18-g of the industries (development and regulation) act, the court held that the act, more specifically section 18-g did not cover sugarcane nor even the parliament's intention to cover the entire field could be inferred. the court was required to find out the meaning of the expression " any article or class or articles relatable to any scheduled industry" used in section 18-g and it held that it did not refer to the raw materials but only to the finished products. the court went into the object to the central act which was equitable distribution and availability of manufactured articles at fair prices. the argument that had been advanced in that case was that the sugarcane act enacted by the state legislature though appears to be a legislation in regard to sugarcane required for use in sugar factory but in pith and substances and its true nature is a legislation in regard to sugar industry which had been declared under the industries (development and regulation act and control of the industry had been taken over by the union. negativing that contention and on examining the contents of entry 24 of list iind entry 27 of the said list ii, the court observed that the controlled industries were relegated to entry 52 of list i which was the exclusive province of parliament leaving the other industries within entry 24 of list ii. in that case, the court was not required to examine the content and scope of the expression "industry" in entry 52 of list i and in fact the court observed that it was concerned with as to whether the raw materials of an industry which form an integral part of the process are within the topic of "industry" which form the subject matter of item 52 of list i. the central legislation which was under consideration in that case as well as the notifications issued by the central government were held to have been enacted by the parliament in exercise of the legislative power conferred upon it by entry 33 of list iii and was an exercise of concurrent jurisdiction and once the law is made by the parliament in the exercise of its concurrent jurisdiction, then it would not deprive the provincial legislature of similar powers which they had under he provincial legislative list. it is important to notice the findings of the court in that case:"it follows as a necessary corollary that even though sugar industry was a controlled industry, none of these acts enacted by the center was in exercise of its jurisdiction under entry 52 of list i."200. whatever observations the court made on which mr. dwivedi placed strong reliance, therefore, cannot be made use of indicating the ambit and contents of the expression "industry" under entry 52 of list i. when the court observed that the terms "industry" which would be capable of comprising three different aspects: (i) raw materials which are an integral part of the industrial process, (ii) the process of manufacture or production and (iii) the distribution of the products of the industry, and held that raw materials should be goods which would be comprised of entry 27 of list ii and the process of manufacture or production would be comprised in entry 24 of list ii, except where the industry was a controlled industry when it would fall under entry 52 of list i, the court was obviously not examining the contents of the expression "industry" under entry 52 of list i and that is why the court observed that the legislation which was enacted by the center in regard to sugar and sugarcane could fall within entry 52 of list i. when the legislation in question that was under consideration was held not to be legislation under entry 52 of list i, the question of applying the ratio in the case of tikaramji, in the context of parliament's power to make a law under entry 52 of list i and the content and scope of such law or the scope and content of the expression "industry" under entry 52 of list i cannot have any application and consequently, on the basis of the judgment of this court in tikaramji, it cannot be contended that the expression "industry" in entry 52 of list i must have a restricted meaning. it is further apparent from the conclusion of the court in that case when it refused to import the pith and substance argument, holding that the same cannot be imported for the simple reasons that both the center as well as the state legislatures were operating in the concurrent field and, therefore, there was no question of any trespass upon the exclusive jurisdiction vested in the center under entry 52 of list i. in other words in tikaramji, neither this court was called upon to examine the content of the expression "industry" under entry 52 of list i nor the relevant central law which was under consideration had been enacted with reference to power under entry 52 of list i. this being the position, we do not find much force in the submission of mr. dwivedi that the conclusion recorded by the majority view in itc case is vitiated, as it had not noticed observations of the constitution bench decision in tikaramji. in our opinion, it would be wholly inappropriate for this court to apply the observations made in tikaramji's case with regard to raw materials of "industry". the court in tikaramji's case having not been called upon to determine the question whether the expression "industry" in entry 52 of list i should be given a restricted meaning at all is contended by mr. dwivedi, it would be wholly inappropriate to import the observations in tikaramji for construing the ambit and content of the subject head of legislation "industry" under entry 52 of list i. since the court was examining the provisions of industries (development and regulation) act, which regulated the manufacturing process until section 18-g was brought in amendment in the year 1953 and the industries (development and regulation) act did not purport to regulate the trade and commerce in the raw materials namely sugarcane and the court n fact was scrutinizing whether the state act enacted by the state legislature could be held to be repugnant to the central legislators it found that there exits no repugnancy and the two acts cover two different fields and would co-exists. in this view of the matter any observations or conclusion of the court in tikaramji will be of no assistance to us arriving at a decision as to whether the term "industry" in entry 52 of list i would have a restricted meaning or would have a wide meaning, which is the normal interpretation of every entry in the respective lists. in calcutta gas case, no doubt tikaramji, had been followed and the court was examining the two competing entries in list ii itself of the seventh schedule of the constitution namely entry 24 and 25. while entry 24 of list ii is "industry" entry 25 is 'gas and gas works' and the question therefore was whether law made by the state legislature on the subject head 'gas and gas works' would prevail over a law made by the state legislature over the subject "industry" and the court held that ;gas works being a special subject head, law made thereunder would prevail over any law made under the general head "industries". it may be observed that in the calcutta gas case (1962 supp. s.c.r.1) at page 17, it has been held "it is not necessary in this case to attempt to define the expression "industry" precisely or to state exhaustively all its ingredients." in view of the aforesaid observations, we fail to understand how this decision can be pressed into service for ascertaining the true import and content of the expression "industry' which is the subject head under consideration in the case in hand. coming to the decision of this court in kanandevan hills produce v. state of kerala manu/sc/0543/1972manu/sc/0543/1972 : [1973]1scr356 , as has been stated earlier, it is the validity of state legislation namely resumption of lands act, 1971, which was under challenge on the ground of lack of legislative competence of the state legislature. the validity of the act was upheld on a conclusion that the law was referable to the legislative head under entry 18 of list ii relating to land and legislative entry 42 of list iii relating to acquisition and requisitioning of property. it is in that context, it was observed that the power of the state legislature to make the law under the aforesaid two entries could not be denied merely on the ground that it had some effect on the industry, the control of which has been taken over under entry 52 of list i. but the court was careful to hold that the effect was not the same thing as subject mater. in other words, the subject matter of "industry" under entry 521 of list i really was not under consideration. in paragraph 29 of the said judgment referring to the case of baijnath kedia v. state of bihar, where the court had construed entry 23 of list i and entry 52 of list i, it observed that the scope of entry 52 of the union list is slightly different and once it is declared by parliament by law to be expedient in public interest to control an industry, parliament can legislate on that particular industry and the states would lose their power to legislate on the industry. necessarily, therefore if the law made by the parliament in relation to a controlled industry, the control of which has been taken over by a declaration in the law, then there cannot be any limitation on the power of the parliament to make any provision having a reasonable and direct nexus with the industry. but at the same time, the parliament cannot make a law, which would have no connection at all with the concerned industry. this, in our opinion is what has been expressed in paragraph 29 of the aforesaid judgment, but by no stretch of imagination, the aforesaid judgment of the court in kanan devan, can be constructed to be an authority for interpreting the expression "industry" in entry 52 of list i by giving it a restricted meaning, as contended by mr. dwivedi. in kanan devan, the petitioner therein had assailed the competence of the state legislature to enact the legislation in question and had relied upon tikaramji, which has been referred to in paragraph 30 of the judgment. but the court in paragraph 33 holds that none of these cases assist the petitioners. in the aforesaid premises, we fail to understand how the decision in kanan devan will be of any assistance to the respondent - state of bihar in support of the contention that the parliament had no legislative competence to enact the tobacco board act under entry 52 of list i, so as to include within the same the provisions relating to growth of tobacco as well as sale and purchase of raw tobacco within the market area. the observations of this court in the constitution bench decision of ganga sugar corpn. case manu/sc/0397/1979manu/sc/0397/1979 : [1980]1scr769 : [1980]1scr769 , on which mr. dwivedi strongly relied upon, though ex facie appears to be supporting the contention of the learned counsel for the state of bihar, but a deeper scrutiny of the same would make it crystal clear that the said observation is of no consequence either in the matter of deciding the ambit of the expression "industry" in entry 52 of list i or in deciding the legislative competence of parliament to make law like the tobacco board act in relation to a controlled industry and making provision therein in respect of the growing of tobacco and purchase and sale of raw tobacco. in ganga sugar's case, the levy of purchase tax on sugar-cane purchased by a factory owner under section 3 of the u.p. sugarcane (purchase tax) act, 1961, was under challenge on the ground that the legislation in question being in respect of a controlled industry, the power belongs exclusively to parliament under entry 52 of list i. the court repelled this contention on the ground that entry 54 in list ii of the seventh schedule empowers the state to legislate for taxes on purchase of goods and therefore, it cannot be said to have invaded entry 52 of list i. the composed the question as to whether the purchase tax act is bad because it is a legislation with respect to a controlled industry namely the sugar industry and answered the same in the negative, following the observations of the earlier constitution bench decision in tikaramji's case. thus the extreme argument that the state legislature is incompetent to make any law with regard to a controlled industry, the control of which has been taken over by the union government by making a declaration, was negatived and it is in that context, the observations on which mr. dwivedi relied upon had been made. we are unable to accept the submission of mr. dwivedi to hold that the decision of this court in ganga sugar, can be pressed into service for a contention that the parliament had no legislative competence to make a legislation in respect of a controlled industry like tobacco and enacting the tobacco act and making provision therein in relation to growing of tobacco as well as sale and purchase of raw tobacco. in our considered opinion, this decision is of no assistance to support the contention of mr. dwivedi, appearing for the state of bihar that the expression "industry" in entry 52 of list i must be given a narrow meaning so as to include only the process of manufacture or production and nothing further. we also reiterate that in none of these aforesaid constitution bench decisions of this court relied upon by mr. dwivedi, appearing for the state of bihar, the true import and meaning of the expression "industry" under entry 52 of list i was for consideration, nor the competence of the parliament to make a legislation in respect of a controlled industry, so as to include within itself the provisions relating to the stage prior to manufacture or production was an issue and consequently these decisions will be of no assistance so as to strike down the provisions of the tobacco board act, so far as the provisions contained therein relating to growing of tobacco/or sale and purchase of raw tobacco.201. it is no doubt true that in ishwari khetan's case manu/sc/0069/1980manu/sc/0069/1980 : [1980]3scr331 : [1980]3scr331 , while construing entry 52 of list i and the effect of the declaration made thereunder by the parliament, the court has relied upon also the legislation made under entry 54 of list i, which was held to be in pari materia with entry 52 of list i and the earlier decision of this court in baij nath kedia's case, has been followed, as contended by mr. shanti bhushan, but we need not embark upon an inquiry in that respect, in view of our conclusion on the question as to what would be the ambit and extent of the expression "industry" occurring in entry 52 of list i. in ishwari khetan's case, the court was construing the scope and ambit of entry 54 of list ii and entry 52 of list i and had observed that the state's power under entry 24 of list ii would get eroded only to the extent the control is assumed by the union pursuant to a declaration made by the parliament in respect of declared industry as spelt out by legislative enactment and the field occupied by such enactment is the measure of erosion and subject to such erosion, on the remainder the state legislature will have power to legislate in respect of declared industry without in any way trenching upon the occupied field. applying the aforesaid ratio to the case in hand and having examined the provisions of the tobacco board act, the answer is irresistible that the state legislature is denuded of its power to make any law in relation to growing of tobacco or sale and purchase of raw tobacco when such a provision has already been made in the tobacco board act.the two other decisions which require to be noticed by us are the case of viswanathiah & co. v. state of karnataka manu/sc/0602/1991manu/sc/0602/1991 : [1991]1scr305 and belsund sugar manu/sc/0457/1999manu/sc/0457/1999 : air1999sc3125 : air1999sc3125 . so far as viswanthiah's case is concerned, mr. dwivedi relied upon the observations made in paragraph 8 of the said judgment wherein the court had observed:-"it is true the silk board act purports to control the raw silk industry in the territory of india. but, as pointed out by the high court inn the light of the earlier decisions of this court therein referred to, the control of the industry vested in parliament was only restricted to the aspect of production and manufacture of silk yarn or silk. it did not obviously take in the earlier stages of the industry, namely, the supply of raw materials."202. according to mr. dwivedi this decision lends support to his contention that the industry in entry 52 of list i will have to be given a restricted meaning, and as such, it would not cover either the growing of tobacco or dealing with sale and purchase of raw tobacco. as has been held by us earlier, the power of the state legislature gets denuded to the extent the central legislation occupies the filed in respect of the controlled industry, the control of which has been taken over by the parliament on a declaration being made. if after taking over the control of the industry in exercise of its legislative competence under entry 52 of list i, the parliament while making a law did no make any provision in relation to the supply of raw material, then merely because the control of the industry has been taken over, the state's power to make legislation in relation to the supply of raw-material would not get denuded. but that does not mean that the parliament cannot make any law in relation to any other aspect other than the aspect of production and manufacture of the industry. in other words, the contention of mr. dwivedi that the parliament's competence to make any law in respect of the legislative head 'industry' in entry 52 of list i would entitle the parliament to make a law only with respect to the production and manufacture and not any earlier stage cannot be accepted to be correct, and the aforesaid decision of this court cannot be held to have laid down the law in that way. so far as belsund sugar company's case is concerned, the question for confederation was, whether the provisions of the bihar agricultural produce markets act would at all be applicable for levy of market fee in respect of sale and purchase of sugar cane, in view of the special provisions contained in the bihar sugar cane regulation of supply and purchase act, 1981. the market committee act was also a state legislation purported to have been enacted under entries 26, 27 and 28 of list ii. the sugar cane regulation of supply and purchase act purported to be a legislation enacted in entry 33 of list iii. the court held that in view of the special act dealing with sale and purchase of sugar cane the general act, namely, the market committee act will have no application at all, and therefore, the levy of market fee by the market committee was held to be invalid. on examining different provisions of the two acts the court also held that there consists direct conflict between the two acts and that conflict could be avoided only if it is held that the market act being a general act covering all types of the agricultural produce and the sugar cane act, which also deals with an agricultural produce like sugar, being a special enactment laying down an independent exclusive machinery for regulating sale, purchase and storage of such a commodity under a special act, then the special act would prevail over the general act for that commodity and by necessary implication will take the said commodity out of the sweep of the general act. this decision, in our considered opinion is not an authority for the proposition that the expression 'industry' in entry 52 of list i should be given a restricted meaning, as contended by mr. dwivedi. in that case also the extreme contention that there exists possibility of issuance of control order by the central government would denude the state legislature of its authority to make a law in respect of any matter coming under any of the entries in list ii was not accepted. but at the same time it is difficult for us to construe the aforesaid decision of having laid down a ratio that in dealing with a central legislating in relation to a controlled industry, the control of which has been taken over by a declaration made by law, enacted by parliament would not clothe the central legislature to make any law other than production or manufacture of the industry in question. belsund sugar (supra) by no stretch of imagination can be construed to have even remotely held that he word 'industry' ought to receive a restricted meaning. the said decision, therefore does not support the contention of mr. dwivedi, appearing for the state of bihar as well as for the state of karnataka. mr. shanti bhushan, learned senior counsel, no doubt argued with vehemence that the principle enunciated in hingir-rampur coal co. ltd. and ors. v. the state of orissa and ors. manu/sc/0037/1960manu/sc/0037/1960 : [1961]2scr537 , belsund sugar manu/sc/0457/1999manu/sc/0457/1999 : air1999sc3125 : air1999sc3125 and state of orissa v. m.a. tulloch & co. manu/sc/0021/1963manu/sc/0021/1963 : [1964]4scr461 , should equally apply to the case in hand while interpreting the scope and extent of the legislative competence of the parliament under entry 52 of list i, but we do not think it necessary to apply the ratio in the aforesaid three cases, inasmuch as in all those cases the court was considering the competing power of the state legislature under entry 23 of list ii and the power of the central legislature under entry 54 of list i. both the entries are on the subject 'regulation of mines and minerals development'. entry 23 of list 2 itself is subject to the provision of list i with respect to the regulation and development under control of the union, and necessarily therefore, when union takes over the control of the mines and minerals development by legislation under entry 54 of list i the state legislature would be denuded to make any law in relation to the mines and minerals development under entry 23 of list ii. but in the case in land, we are concerned with the legislation made by the parliament under entry 52 of list i which is the tobacco board act and the legislation made by the state legislature under entry 28 or any other ancillary entry like entry 14 or entry 27 of list ii, namely the bihar agricultural produce market act. in such a case the focus for consideration of the court would be as to what is the scope and content of entry 52 of list i and once it is held that the expression 'industry' cannot be given any restricted meaning and the law enacted by the parliament, the tobacco board act, is held to be intra vires then the state legislation, namely, the bihar agricultural produce market act, so far as it deals with the commodity tobacco will go out of the general sweep of all agricultural produce notified under the state act, as the provisions in respect thereof have been made by the central legislating and by application of article 246 of the constitution the central act would prevail.203. mr. dwivedi placed reliance on the full bench decision of allahabad high court in siel's case (supra), but in view of our conclusions already arrived at, the aforesaid full bench decision must be held not to have been correctly decided. it is also difficult for us to accept the submission of dr. singhvi, learned senior counsel appearing for the market committee of monghyr, that if the subject head of legislation in list ii is not subject to the corresponding entry in list i then the power of state legislature to legislate with regard to that matter is paramount and supreme, and therefore, the market committee act being relatable to entries 14 and 28 of list ii, which are not subject to any of the entries of list i, the market committee act must be allowed to prevail. in out considered opinion, the aforesaid approach to consider the validity of a law made by the parliament or a law made by the state legislature is not a correct approach. the entries merely being the subject head of the legislation and the power to make law having emanated from article 246, if a particular law made by parliament comes within the legislative competence of the parliament with reference to any of the entries in list i then the state legislature would not have the competence to make law with respect to that subject with reference to some other entries in list ii. it is of course true, that courts while examining the competing legislations would make an attempt and see whether both the legislations could operate, and that question we will deal later. but the contention that entries 14 and 28 of list ii not being subject to any entry under list i and the market committee act being relatable to entries 14 and 28 of list ii the same should be allowed to operate notwithstanding the wide meaning to the word 'industry' in entry 52 of list i and the parliament has already taken over the control of the industry and has made law in that respect cannot be sustained. in the context of our conclusions on the question of he import and extent of expression 'industry' in entry 52 of list i it is not necessary to examine the other contentions of dr. singhvi that whether the theory of occupied field is relevant only in case of law made with reference to entries in list iii. we are also not persuaded to agree with the submission of dr. singhvi that the market committee act can still be operative and the market fee could be levied by the market committee under the state act for services provided by it on the principle of quid pro quo even if the court comes to the conclusion that the tobacco board act is a valid piece of legislation enacted by the parliament and that act also has made necessary provision of r growing of tobacco as well as purchase and sale of tobacco. we are also unable to sustain the argument of mr. sanghi, learned senior counsel appearing for krishi mandi in the madhya pradesh batch of appeals, that the enquiry in the case should be whether the state legislature had the legislative competence to enact the market committee act under 28 of list ii. his other submission on the question that there is no irreconcilable clash between the two acts and the meaning of section 31 of tobacco board act will be considered while considering the different provisions of the two acts. mr. ganguli, learned senior counsel appearing for the tamil nadu agricultural marketing board also submitted in the same manner as dr. singhvi and relied upon article 246(3) of the constitution. but in our considered opinion article 246(1) itself being notwithstanding anything in clauses 2 and 3 of the said article the submission of mr. ganguli is devoid of any force. the elaborate submissions of mr. ganguli in relation to the decisions of this court in baij nath kedia, m.a. tulloch, india cement and orissa cement, all of which dealt with mining legislations are not necessary to be dealt with inasmuch as we have not relied upon the principles enunciated in those decisions, even though mr. shanti bhushan pressed those decisions in support of his contention.204. in the aforesaid premises, we are of the considered opinion that the tobacco board act enacted by the parliament under entry 52 of list i is constitutionally valid and all the provisions therein, including the provisions relating to growing of tobacco and sale and purchase of tobacco are within the legislative competence of the parliament. we are also further of the opinion that the word 'industry' in entry 52 of list i cannot be given a restricted meaning, particularly when a conspectus of all the decisions interfering entry in any of the lists of the constitution including he minority view of mukherjee, j. in itc case is to the effect that the entries in the list should be given liberal and generous construction and it is well accepted cardinal rule of interpretation that the words in constitutional document, conferring legislative powers should be construed most liberally and in their widest amplitude.205. coming to the second question, it is no doubt true as a matter of principle of construction that in the event there are two competing legislations, one by the parliament and one by the state, the court would make an endeavour if both the legislations could be allowed to be operated upon. but on examining the provisions of the two acts, if it is found that the central legislation and the state legislation come in collision with each, then question of allowing both of them to operate would not arise. in such an event, the central legislation would prevail, provided the said legislation is otherwise constitutionally valid namely the parliament had the legislative competence to enact the legislation in question. from the aforesaid stand point, if we examine the different provisions of the tobacco board act, more particularly sections 3 8 and 32 and the provisions of the agricultural produce markets act, more particularly section 4(2) thereof as well as section 15, which is said to be the heart and soul of the markets act in belsund's case, the conclusion is irresistible that the two acts come in direct collision with each other and it is difficult to reconcile the provisions of both the acts. necessarily, therefore, the tobacco board act having been enacted by the parliament and making all provisions in relation to the tobacco industry including the provisions for growing of tobacco as well as sale and purchase of raw tobacco, in accordance with the procedure prescribed under the said act, the provisions of the agricultural produce markets act, entitling the market committee to levy fee for sale and purchase of raw tobacco within the market area will not be operative, so far as the produce 'tobacco' is concerned. in other words, central act would prevail and would govern the entire gamut of tobacco industry. it is also important to bear in mind that when parliament decides to take over the control of a particular industry in the interest of the said industry as well as in the national interest, the control should be effective and should be in such a manner that the desired object can be achieved. necessarily therefore, legislation ought to be made providing control over the growing of tobacco as well as on its sale and purchase, which alone would subserve the very purpose for which the control of the industry has been taken over by the parliament. in this view of the matter, we hold that the tobacco board act and the agricultural produce markets act, collide with each other and cannot be allowed to be operated simultaneously. necessarily, therefore, the tobacco board act would prevail and the agricultural produce markets act, so far as it relates to levy of fee for sale and purchase of tobacco within the market area must be held to go out of the purview of the said act.206. coming to the third question posed by us in view of the inconsistency and repugnancy between the two acts, as already stated, it is the central act that would prevail and in our opinion, the majority judgment in the itc case has been correctly decided, though the reasons for the same given by us may be slightly different than the reasons which persuaded the learned judges to have the conclusion in the itc case.207. in view of our conclusion on the three issues, the impugned judgment of the patna high court, remitting the matter to the market committee for passing a fresh assessment order is set aside and it is held that the sale and purchase of tobacco within the market area of any market committee would not be subjected to the provisions of the bihar agricultural produce markets act. civil appeal no. 6453 of 2001 is accordingly allowed.208. civil appeal no. 3872 of 1990, filed by the krishi utpadan mandi samiti against the division bench judgment of allahabad high court stands dismissed.209. we also set aside the full bench decision of the allahabad high court and the appeal filed by the tobacco merchant's association, assailing the legality of the full bench decision of the allahabad high court is allowed. similarly, the judgment of the division bench of the high court of madras, which follows the majority view of this court in itc case, is upheld and the appeals filed by the state of tamil nadu as well as the tamil nadu agricultural marketing board are dismissed.210. civil writ petition filed by the jayalakshmi tobacco company under article 32, registered as civil writ petition no. 8614 of 1982, challenging the validity of the provisions of karnataka agricultural produce marketing (regulation) act, stands disposed of and the said act, enacted by the state legislation of karnataka must be held to be invalid, so far as the provisions authorising levy of fee on sale and purchase of tobacco within the market area is concerned.211. the twelve appeals filed against the judgment of madhya pradesh high court are dismissed and the judgment of the division bench of madhya pradesh high court is upheld.212. in different appeals arising out of the judgment of the madhya pradesh high court, interim stay had been granted by different benches on 27.4.88, 2.5.88, 17.8.88 and 5.10.88. by these orders, the court had stayed the operation of the judgment, without any condition. all these orders stood modified by order dated 27.2.89, when the court passed the following order:".....there will no recovery of arrears due. there will also be no stay of the refund collected if any. the amount collected may be refunded within four months from this date. in future there will be no stay of recovery of market-fee found due and payable from the date of the high court's judgment. it is, however, made clear that if the parties have filed objection against the levy, the objection shall be disposed of in accordance with law before the recovery is restored. in case, ultimately if the respondents succeed then the amount collected will be refunded by the appellants along with the interest @ 12% per annum. in case the appellants succeed then the respondents undertaken to pay the arrears of market-fee along with the interest @ 12% per annum from the date of the payment."213. now that the judgment of the high court is being upheld and the appeals are being dismissed, the question for consideration would be as to whether the said order of stay dated 27.2.1989 should be modified or the order should be allowed to operate and the collected market-fee would be (sic) to be refunded with interest @ 12% per annum in accordance with the order dated 27.2.1989. having regard to the facts and circumstances and the resources of the market committee, we think it appropriate to modify the said order dated 27.2.1989 and direct that the market-fee already collected from the sale and purchase of tobacco within the market area by the mandi samiti, need not be refunded. but at the same time, the market committee will not be entitled to collect the same, even for any past period, if the same has not already been collected.
1. as regards applicability of section 5 of the limitation act, 1963 in the matter of default in deposit of rent as also interpretation of the word 'shall' occurring in the rajasthan premises (control of rent & eviction) act, 1950 (hereinafter referred to 'the act', for the sake of brevity), a division bench of this court by an order dated 21.3.2002 referred the matter to a three judge bench observing:"...looking to the importance of the questions and the conflicting views taken in the judgments of this court, we deem it proper that the case is heard by a bench of three judges."2. that is how the matter is before us.3. before adverting to the aforementioned questions, the factual matrix involved in the matter may be noticed. the appellant herein is the landlord in respect of the suit premises and the respondent is a tenant therein. allegedly, the respondent did not pay rent for the period 1.8.1986 to 31.1.1987 wherefor upon service of the legal notice, a suit for possession and arrears of rent was filed which was marked as civil suit no. 824 of 1993.4. the learned trial judge in terms of the provisions contain din section 13(3) of the act determined the provisional rent @ rs.80/-per month and by an order dated 9.9.1991 directed the respondent to deposit the arrears as also current rent in court. admittedly, the respondent did not deposit the same within the period specified therein. the appellant herein filed an application purported to be under section 13(5) of the act; whereafter on or about 9.11.1993 the respondent filed an application for condonation of delay. by reason of an order dated 20.1.1994, the said application for condonation of delay was dismissed, inter alia, on the ground that the same was not filed within time. a revision application was thereafter filed by the respondent questioning the legality of validity of the said order, inter alia, on the ground that there is no law barring filing of an application for condonation of delay after expiry of the period specified for deposit of rent.5. it appears that a full bench of the rajasthan high court in gopal dass and ors. v. nathulal baraya manu/rh/0044/1983manu/rh/0044/1983 had held that an application under section 5 of the limitation act in the matter of deposit of rent in terms of section 13(4) of the act was maintainable. the said decision was rendered having regard to rajasthan premises (control of rent & eviction) (an endment) act, 1975, in terms whereof section 13-a was inserted whereby and whereunder the court was obligated to determine the amount of arrears of rent up to the date of the order as also the amount of interest thereon at the rate of 6% per annum and cost of the suit allowable to the landlord and direct the tenant to pay the amount so determined within such time, not exceeding ninety days as may be fixed by the court and on such payment being made within the time fixed as aforesaid, the proceedings were to be disposed of as if the tenant has not committed any default.6. a learned single judge of the high court at the hearing of the revision application filed by the respondent was, however, of the view that as the full bench in gopal dass's case (supra) was concerned with interpretation of section 13-a(b) of the act; the question as regards applicability of section 5 of the limitation act in the matter arising under section 13(4) of the said act requires consideration by a larger bench. the learned single judge was further of the view that the decision of the full bench in gopal dass's case (supra) required reconsideration also on the question as to whether the court has any power to extend the time beyond the period prescribed under section 13(4) of the act having regard to the fact that the said decision based on various judgments of this court relating to different rent control statues of various states which were not in pari materia with the provisions of the act.7. pursuant to or in furtherance of the said observations of the learned single judge, a full bench of five judges was constituted. by reason of the impugned judgment dated 17.12.1997, three hon'ble judges of the high court held that section 5 of the limitation act is applicable, where there is default in deposit of arrears of rent within specified period whereas two other members of the bench held to the contrary.8. the full bench was further of the view that since the applicability of the indian limitation act, 1963 is not expressly excluded by reason of the provisions of the act, section 5 of the limitation act, 1963 would be applicable in case where the tenant could not deposit the rent within the time pursuant to the order passed under section 13(3) of the act. the full bench also held that the word "shall" has to be interpreted as "may" and it is in the discretion of the court to condone the delay in default of payment/ deposit of rent within specified period.9. in that view of the matter, the order rejecting the application under section 5 of the limitation act was set aside and the revision petition filed by the respondent was allowed. it is against the said judgment, the appellants have preferred this appeal.10. two questions which arise for our consideration are, firstly, that whether the matter stands covered by the decision of this court in b.p. khemka pvt. ltd. v. birendra kumar bhowmic and anr. manu/sc/0783/1987manu/sc/0783/1987 : [1987]2scr559 ; and, secondly, whether the provisions of section 5 of the limitation act, 1963 is applicable where there is a default in depositing the rent within stipulated time by the tenant.11. section 13(1)(a) of the act enables a landlord to sue for a decree of eviction in the event a tenant has neither paid nor tendered the amount of rent due from him for six months. in terms of sub-section (3) of section 13 which was substituted by section 8(i) of the rajasthan act no. 14 of 1976 it is obligatory on the court to provisionally determine the amount of rent wherefor no application is required to be filed. sub-sections (4) and (5) of the said act which are relevant for this appeal read thus:-"(4) the tenant shall deposit in court or pay to the landlord the amount determined by the court under sub-section (3) within fifteen days from the date of such determination, or within such further time, not exceeding three months, as may be extended by the court. the tenant shall also continue to deposit in court or pay to the landlord, month by month, the monthly rent subsequent to the period up to which determination has been made, by the fifteenth of each succeeding month or within such further time not exceeding fifteen days, as may be extended by the court, at the monthly rate at which the rent was determined by the court under sub-section (3).(5). if a tenant fails to deposit or pay any amount referred to in sub-section (4), on the date or within he time specified therein, the court shall order the defence against eviction to be struck out and shall proceed with the hearing of the suit."12. a bare perusal of the aforementioned provisions would show that in terms of sub-section (4) of section 13, a tenant is required to deposit the amount of rent determined by the court under sub-section (3) within fifteen days of the date of determination or within such further time not exceeding three months, as may be extended by the court.13. it is not in dispute that by reason of 1976 amendment, the following was specifically inserted:-"within such further time not exceeding 3 months as may be extended by the court or the words" or within such further time not exceeding 15 days as may be extended by the court, at the monthly rate at which the rent was determined by the court under sub-section (3)"14. the word 'shall', which is ordinarily imperative in nature, has been used in sub-section (4) of section 13. the power of the court has also been limited to the extent that it can extend time for such deposit nor exceeding three months and so far as the deposit of monthly rent is concerned, by fifteen days. the court's power, therefore, is restricted. in case tenant deposits the provisional rent as determined by the court within stipulated period the tenant is relieved by the eviction decree.15. in the aforementioned backdrop, the decision of this court in b.p. khemka's case (supra) may be noticed.16. b.p. khemka (supra) arose out of the west bengal premises tenancy act, 1956 (in short 'the west bengal act'). in the said case the tenant committed default in payment of arrears of rent and the landlord brought a suit for eviction on the ground of default. while the suit was pending, the west bengal premises tenancy (amendment) ordinance no.6 of 1967, which was replaced by the west bengal premises tenancy (amendment) act 30 of 1969 came to be promulgated with effect from august 26, 1967. the act gave a retrospective effect to the amendments by providing that the amendments made by section 2 of the ordinance shall have effect in respect of all suits including appeals which were pending at the date of commencement of the ordinance. the amendments inter alia enabled tenants who were in default to apply to the court and pay the arrears of rent in installments and thereby avert their eviction. in pursuance thereof, the tenant deposited the rent. however, he subsequently committed default in paying monthly rent. consequently, the defence was struck off on the ground that in paying the rent for the months of september, 1968 and march 1969, there had been a delay of 44 days and 6 days respectively, which was in contravention of section 17(1) of the west bengal act.17. in this context (sic) (2a), (2b), (3) and (4) of section 17 of the west bengal act may be noticed which read as under:"(2a) notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) on the application of the tenant the court, may, by order:(a) extend the time specified in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) for the deposit or payment of any amount referred to therein.(b)x x x(2b) no application for extension of time for the deposit or payment of any amount under clause (a) of sub-section (2a) shall be entertained unless it is made before the expiry of the time specified therefore in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2);""(3) if a tenant fails to deposit, or pay any amount referred to in sub-section (1) or sub- section (2) within the time specified therein or with such extended time as may be allowed under clause (a) of sub-section (2-a), or fails to deposit or pay any installment permitted under clause (b) of sub-section (2-a) within the time fixed therefore, the court shall order the defence against delivery of possession to be struck out and shall proceed with the hearing of the suit.(4) if a tenant makes deposit or payment as required by sub-section (1), sub-section (2), or sub-section (2-a) no decree or order for delivery of possession of the premises to the landlord on the ground of default in payment of rent by the tenant shall be made by the court but the court may allow such costs as it may deem fit to the landlord."18. this court in b.p. khemka's case (supra) while interpreting the provisions of sub-section (4) held that the proviso makes it clear that if the subsequent default is for a period of 4 months within a period of 12 months. the tenant can claim relief under the sub-section, once again. since the default was less than 40 days, this court held that under the said proviso, the delay could be condoned.19. in terms of clause (a) of sub-section (2a) of section 17 of the west bengal premises tenancy act, 1956 requisite power to extend the time for deposit of rent on an application made by the tenant is conferred in the court in relation whereto there does not exist any restriction.20. it is beyond any cail that the question as to whether the provision is directory or mandatory would depend upon the language employed therein. [see union of india and ors. v. filip tiago de gama of vedem vasco de gama manu/sc/0622/1989manu/sc/0622/1989 : (1990)1scc277 ].21. this court in bhavnagar university v. palitana sugar mill pvt. ltd. and ors. manu/sc/1092/2002manu/sc/1092/2002 : air2003sc511 , has observed:-scope of the legislation on the intention of the legislature cannot be enlarged when the language on the provision is plain and unambiguous. in other words statutory enactments must ordinarily be construed according to its plain meaning and no word shall be added, altered or modified unless it penalty necessary to do so to prevent a provision from being an intelligible, absurd, unreasonable, unworkable totally irreconcilable with the rest(sic) tube industries pvt. ltd. v. u.p. financial corporation and ors. manu/sc/1218/2002manu/sc/1218/2002 : [2002]supp5scr666 .22. it is also a well-settled principle of law that the decision on an interpretation of one statute can be followed while interpreting another provided both the statues are in pari materia and they deal with identical scheme.23. the high court relied upon the following decisions dealing with respectively with the rent control acts of the different states:i) manu/sc/0504/1979manu/sc/0504/1979 : [1980]2scr334 -shyamcharan sharma v. dharmdas -- manu/sc/0476/1980manu/sc/0476/1980 : dealing with the m.p. accommodation control act,ii) [1980]3scr325 -miss santosh mehta v. om prakash and ors. -- manu/sc/0324/1984manu/sc/0324/1984 : dealing with the delhi rent control act.iii) air1984sc1392 -ram murti v. bholanath and ors. -- manu/sc/0377/1985manu/sc/0377/1985 : dealing with the delhi rent control act.iv) [1985]3scr825 -ganesh prasad sah kesri v. lakshmi narain gupta -- manu/sc/0783/1987manu/sc/0783/1987 : dealing with the bihar building.v) [1987]2scr559 -b.p. khemka pvt. ltd. v. birendra kumar bhowmick and ors. -- dealing with west bengal premises tenancy act.24. the question, therefore, which would arise for our consideration is as to whether the respective state acts on the basis whereupon the impugned judgments of this court had been rendered are analogous to the provisions of the act or not.25. in shayma charan sharma v. dharmdas manu/sc/0504/1979manu/sc/0504/1979 : [1980]2scr334 , the provisions of the m.p. accommodation control act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as "the m.p. act") was in question. sub-sections (1) and (6) of section 13 thereof are as follows:"(1) on a suit or proceeding being instituted the landlord on any of the ground referred to in section 12, the tenant shall, within one month of the service of summons on him or within such further time as the court may, on an application made to it, allow in this behalf, deposit in the court to pay to the landlord an amount calculated at the rate of rent at which it was paid for which the rent may have made default including the period subsequent thereto up to the end of the month previous to that in which the deposit or payment is made; and shall thereafter continue to deposit or pay, month by month, by the 15th of each succeeding month a sum equivalent to the rent at the rate.(6) if the tenant fails to deposit or pay any amount as required by this section the court may order the defence against eviction to be struck out an shall proceed with the hearing of the suit."(emphasis mine)26. a bare perusal of the said provisions would clearly go to show that by reason of the provisions of section 13(1) of the m.p. act, the court has been conferred power to extend the time for deposit of rent to any such further time, as it may, on an application made to it, allow in this behalf. the power of the court under the m.p. act is not restricted. however, discretion available to the court under the rajasthan act, as noticed (sic). furthermore, in sub-section (6) of section 13 of the m.p. act, the word 'may' has been used which is directory; in contra-distinction with the word 'shall' employed in the rajasthan act.27. the m.p. act provides for the power of the court to extend the time in the event sufficient cause therefore is shown which is absent in the rajasthan act. furthermore, in terms thereof once the rent has been determined, the same has to be deposited within the prescribed period wherefore there exists no provision for filing an application.28. in miss santosh mehta v. om prakash and ors. manu/sc/0476/1980manu/sc/0476/1980 : [1980]3scr325 and ram murti v. bholanathy and ors. manu/sc/0324/1984manu/sc/0324/1984 : air1984sc1392 , this court was concerned with the provision of section 15 of the delhi rent control act, 1958 which is in the following terms:(1) in any proceeding for the recovery of possession of any premises on the ground specified in clause (a) of the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 14, the controller shall after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, make an order directing the tenant to pay to the landlord or deposit with the controller within one month of the date of the order an amount calculated at the rate of rent at which it was last paid for the period for which the arrears of rent were legally recoverable from the tenant including the period subsequent thereto up to the end of the month previous to that in which payment or deposit is made and to continue to pay to deposit, month by month by the 15th of each succeeding month a sum equivalent to the rate of rent.(3) if in any proceedings referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), there is any dispute as to the amount of rent payable by the tenant, the controller shall, within fifteen days of the date of first hearing of the proceedings fix an interim rent in relation to the premises to be paid or deposited in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the case may be, until the standard rent in relation thereto is fixed having regard to the provisions of this act, and the amount of arrears, if any, calculated on the basis of standard rent shall be paid or deposited by the tenant within one month of the date on such further time as the controller may allow in this behalf.(7) if the tenant fails to deposit or pay any amount as required by this section the court may order the defence against eviction to be struck out and shall proceed with the hearing of the application."(emphasis mine)29. yet again section 15 of the delhi rent control act confers power upon the court to extend the time for deposit of rent to any such period, as it may in this behalf deem fit. furthermore, even in sub-section (7) of section 15 the word 'may' has been used. we may notice that under sub-section (5) of section 13 of the old act the word 'shall' has been used and construing the said provision, this court in v.k. verma v. radhey shyam manu/sc/0283/1963manu/sc/0283/1963 : air1964sc1317 , noticed:"...the change of words from "the court shall order the defence against ejectment to be struck out" to the words "the controller may order the defence against eviction to be stuck out " is clearly deliberate modification in law in favour of the tenant . under the old act the court had no option but to strike out the defence if failure to pay or deposit the rent is proved; under the new act the controller who takes the place of the court has a discretion in the matter, so that in proper cases he may refuse to strike out the defence."(emphasis mine)30. in ganesh prasad sah kesri v. lakshmi narain gupta manu/sc/0377/1985manu/sc/0377/1985 : [1985]3scr825 , this court was concerned with interpretation of section 11-a of the bihar buildings (lease rent and eviction) control act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to 'bihar act of 1947') which was in the following term:"11-a. deposit of rent by tenants in suits for ejectment--if in a suit for recovery of possession the tenant contests the suit, as regards claim for ejectment, the landlord may make an application at any stage of the suit for order on the tenant to deposit month by month rent at a rate at which it was last paid and also the arrears of rent, if any; and the court, after giving an opportunity to the parties to be heard, may make an order for deposit of rent at such rate as may be determined month by month and the arrears of rent, if any, and on failure of the tenant to deposit the arrears of rent within fifteen days of the date of the order or the rent at such rate for any month by the fifteenth day of the next following month, the court shall order the defence against ejectment to be struck out and the tenant to be placed in the same position as if he had not defended the claim to ejectment. the landlord may also apply for permission to withdraw the deposited rent without prejudice to his right to claim decree for ejectment and the court may permit him to do so. the court may further order the recovery of cost of suit and such other compensation as may be determined by it from the tenant."31. the said provision of the bihar act of 1947 did not contain any negative provision as is there in the present act. furthermore, even under the said provision an application was required to be filed which is not the case in this appeal. for that reasons the decision in ganesh prasad sah kesri (supra) is distinguishable and has no application to the present case.32. we may further notice that in shibu chandra dhar v. pasupati nath auddya manu/sc/0161/2002manu/sc/0161/2002 : [2002]2scr249 , which also arose out of the west bengal premises tenancy act, it was held that under sub-section (2a) of section 17 of the act, the court has a power to extend the period for depositing the rent in the event of default by the tenant to deposit the rent within a stipulated time. this court further held that if a court has no power to extend the time, then in cases of small default beyond the reason of the tenant, the time cannot be extended.(emphasis mine)33. it is interesting to note that in ganpat ladha v. shashikant vishnu shinde manu/sc/0378/1978manu/sc/0378/1978 : [1978]3scr198 , this court while interpreting similar provisions occurring in section 12(3)(a) of the bombay rent, hotel, lodging houses rates control act 1947 (hereinafter referred to as "the bombay rent act") held:"section 12(3)(b) does not create any discretionary jurisdiction in the court, it provides protection to the tenant on certain conditions and these conditions have to be strictly observed by the tenant who seeks the benefit of the section. if the statutory provisions do not go far enough to relieve the hardship of the tenant the remedy lies with the legislature, it is not in the hands of the court."thus under the bombay rent act only on certain grounds the court can exercise its discretionary power and not on other grounds.34. yet again in mrs. manju choudhary and anr. v. dulal kumar chandra manu/sc/0779/1987manu/sc/0779/1987 : air1988sc602 , this court interpreting the provision of section 15 of the bihar buildings, (lease, rent and eviction) control ordinance 1982 being ordinance no.63 of 1982 (hereinafter refereed to as 'the bihar rent ordinance, 1982'), held:"section 13 of the act stipulates that if in a suit for recovery of possession of any building the tenant contests the suit as regards the claim for ejectment, the landlord may move an application at any stage of the suit for an order on the tenant to deposit rent month by month at the rate at which it was last paid and also subject to the law of limitation, the arrears of rent, if any, and the court after giving an opportunity to the parties to be heard may make an order to deposit the rent month by month at such rates as to be determined and the arrears both before and after the institution of the suit, if any, and thereafter provides "on failure of the tenant to deposit the arrears of rent within 15 days of the next following month the court shall order the defence against the ejectment to be struck off". therefore, there is a duty cast on the court to strike out the defence if there is a failure of the tenant to deposit arrears of rent within 15 days. in this case, both the trial court as well as the high court have found that there was, in fact, a delay to pay the arrears of rent within 15 days. in that view of the matter it is not possible to interference with the order of the high court."35. in the said there was delay of about four to five days in depositing the rent allegedly on the ground of bank strike but the defence against the eviction was struck off.36. in a case where the statutory provision is plain and unambiguous, the court shall not interpret the same in a different manner, only because of harsh consequences arising therefrom. in e. palanisamy v. palanisamv (dead) by lrs. and ors. manu/sc/0967/2002manu/sc/0967/2002 : air2003sc153 , a division bench of this court observed:"....the rent legislation is normally intended for the benefit of the tenants. at the same time, it is well settled that the benefits conferred on the tenants through the relevant statutes can be enjoyed only on the basis of strict compliance with the statutory provisions. equitable consideration has no place in such matters..."37. it is also pertinent to note that the rent control act is a welfare legislation not entirely beneficial enactment for the tenant but also for the benefit of landlord. [see: shri lakshmi venkateshwara enterprises pvt. ltd. v. syeda vajhiunnissa begum (smt.) and ors. manu/sc/0668/1994manu/sc/0668/1994 : (1994)2scc671 . in that view of the matter, balance has to be struck while interpreting the provisions of the rent act.38. the court's jurisdiction to interpret a statute can be invoked when the same is ambiguous. it is well known that in a given case the court can iron out the fabric but it cannot change the texture of the fabric. it cannot enlarge the scope of legislation or intention when the language of provision is plain and unambiguous. it cannot add or subtract words to a statute or read something into it which is not there. it cannot re-write or recast legislation. it is also necessary to determine that there exists a presumption that the legislature has not used any superfluous words. it is well-settled that the real intention of the legislation must be gathered from the language used. it may be true that use of the expression 'shall or may' is not decisive for arriving at a finding as to whether statute is directory or mandatory. but the intention of the legislature must be found out from the scheme of the act. it is also equally well-settled that when negative words are used the courts will presume that the intention of the legislature was that the provisions are mandatory in character.39. yet there is another aspect of the matter which cannot be lost sight of. it is well-settled, principle that if an act is required to be performed by a private person within a specified time, the same would ordinarily be mandatory but when a public functionary is required to perform a public function within a time-frame, the same will be held to be directory unless the consequences therefore are specified. in sutherland, statutory construction, 3rd edition, vol. 3 at p. 107 , it is pointed out that a statutory direction to private individuals should generally be considered as mandatory and that the rule is just the opposite to that which obtains with respect to public officers. again, at p. 109, it is pointed out that often the question as to whether a mandatory or directory construction should be given to a statutory provision may be determined by an expression in the statute itself of the result that shall follow non-compliance with the provision.at p.111 it is stated as follows:"as a corollary of the rule outlined above, the fact that no consequences of non-compliance are stated in the statute, has been considered as a factor tending towards a directory construction. but this is only an element to be considered, and is by no means conclusive."40. thus, on analysis of the aforesaid two decisions we find that wherever the special act provides for extension of time or condonation of default, the court possesses the power therefore, but where the statute does not provide either for extension of time or to condone the default in depositing the rent within the stipulated period, the court does not have the power to do so.41. in that view of the matter it must be held that in absence of such provisions in the present act the court did not have the power to either extend the period to deposit the rent or to condone the default in depositing the rent.42. coming to the second question, we are of the view that section 5 of the limitation act, 1963 is not applicable where there is a default in depositing the rent by the tenant under section 13(4) of the act.43. it is true that rajasthan act does not expressly exclude the application of limitation act. but section 5 in its terms is not applicable to wherever there is a default in depositing the rent by the tenant.44. section 5 of the limitation act reads thus:"5. extension of prescribed period in certain cases.--any appeal or any application, other than an application under any of the provisions of order xxi of the code of civil procedure, 1908, may be admitted after the prescribed period, if the appellant or the applicant satisfied the court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or making the application within such period."45. on perusal of the said section it is evident that the question of application of section 5 would arise where any appeal or any application may be admitted after the prescribed period, if the appellant or the applicant satisfies the court that he had sufficient cause for not making the appeal or application within such period. section 13(4) provides that in a suit for eviction on the grounds set forth in clause (a) of sub-section (1), the tenant shall on the first date of hearing or on or before such date, the court may on the application fixed in this behalf or within such time the tenant shall deposit in court or pay to the landlord in court as determined under sub-section (3) from the date of such determination or within such further time not exceeding three months as may be extended by the court. thus, sub-section (4) itself provides for limitation of a specific period within which the deposit has to be made, which cannot be exceeding three months as extended by this court.46. the matter may be examined from another angle. the deposit by the tenant within 15 days is not an application within the meaning of section 5 of the limitation act, 1963. since the deposit does not require any application, therefore, the provisions of section 5 cannot be extended where_ the default takes place in complying with an order under sub-section (4) of section 13 of the act.47. the provisions of section 5 of the limitation act must be construed having regard to section 3 thereof. for filing an application after the expiry of the period prescribed under the limitation act or any special statute a cause of action must arise. compliance of an order passed by a court of law in terms of a statutory provision does not give rise to a cause of action. failure to comply with an order passed by a court of law instant consequences are provided for under the statute. the court can condone the default only when the statute confers such a power on the court and not otherwise. in that view of the matter we have no other option but to hold that section 5 of the limitation act, 1963 has no application in the instant case.48. in jayanta cycle and motor mart, kanpur v. assistant commissioner, sales tax manu/up/0041/1969manu/up/0041/1969 : air1969all200 , v.g. oak, cj observed:"delay may be condoned if a party makes delay in filing an appeal or moving an application, but no such situation arose in the present case. the petitioner made delay in depositing the admitted tax. the appeal itself was filed within time. the assistant commissioner rightly held that there was no room to give the appellant the benefit of section 5 of indian limitation act."49. pathak, j., (as he then was) observed:"section 5 is not attracted when the question arises whether the delay in depositing the admitted tax should be condoned. it seems to me that the application made by the petitioner for condonation of delay in depositing the entire amount of admitted tax is not maintainable under section 5 of limitation act."50. in hukumdev narain yadav v. lalit narain mishra manu/sc/0247/1973manu/sc/0247/1973 : [1974]3scr31 , p. jaganmohan reddy, j. held that section 5 of the limitation act does not govern an election petition. the said decision has been followed in kulamani kar and ors. v. orissa land reforms tribunal-cum-subordinate judge, cuttack and ors. , manu/or/0021/1983manu/or/0021/1983 : air1983ori63 .51. in the commissioner of sales tax, uttar pradesh, lucknow v. parson tools and plants, kanpur manu/sc/0449/1975manu/sc/0449/1975 : [1975]3scr743 , this court upon referring to various decisions observed:"thus the principle that emerges is that if the legislature in a special statute prescribes a certain period of limitation for filing a particular application thereunder and provides in clear terms that such period on sufficient cause being shown, may be extended, in the maximum, only upto a specified time-limit and no further, then the tribunal concerned has no jurisdiction to treat within limitation, an application filed before it beyond such maximum time-limit specified in the statute, by excluding the time spent in prosecuting in good faith and due diligence any prior proceedings on the analogy of section 14(2) of the limitation act."52. in state of west bengal and ors. v. kartick chandra das and ors. manu/sc/0614/1996manu/sc/0614/1996 : air1996sc2437 , this court observed:"in consequence, by operation of section 29(2) read with section 3 of the limitation act, limitation stands prescribed as a special law under section 19 of the contempt of courts act and limitation in filing letters patent appeals stands attracted. in consequence, sections 4 to 24 of the limitation act stands attracted to letters patent appeal insofar as and to the extent to which they are not expressly excluded either by special or local law. since the rules made on the appellate side, either for entertaining the appeals under clause 15 of the letters patent or appeals arising under the contempt of courts, had not expressly excluded, section 5 of the limitation act becomes applicable. we hold that section 5 to the limitation act does apply to the appeals filed against the order of the learned single judge for the enforcement by way of a contempt. the high court, therefore, was not right in holding that section 5 of the limitation act does not apply. the delay stands condoned. since the high court had not dealt with the matter on merits, we decline of express any opinion on merits. the case stands remitted to the division bench for decision on merits."53. furthermore, for constituting an application within the meaning of the said provision, there should be some request. [see prem raj v. ram charan , manu/sc/0309/1974manu/sc/0309/1974 : [1974]3scr494 ].54. mr. gupta, appearing on behalf of the respondent, however, placed reliance upon a decision of this court in mukri gopalan v. cheppilat puthanpurayil aboobacker manu/sc/0453/1995manu/sc/0453/1995 : air1995sc2272 . therein this court was concerned with extension of period of limitation in a case wherein an appeal was to be preferred before an appellate authority under the kerala buildings (lease and rent control) act, 1965. as for preferring an appeal a period of limitation is prescribed, it was held that section 5 of the act was applicable and, therefore, the said decision is of no help to the respondent.55. similarly in shantilal m. bhavani v. shanti bai , this court was concerned with the question as to whether the provision of section 5 of the act would be applicable to an appeal filed before the appellate authority functioning under the t.n. buildings (lease and rent control) act, 1960.56. the question which arose for consideration therein was whether the appellate authority was a court or a persona designata. having regard to the provisions of contained in sub-section (2) of section 29, it was held that the limitation act, 1963 applies. such is not the case here and, therefore, the said decision is distinguishable.57. for the aforesaid reasons, we are of the view that the judgment of the high court cannot be sustained. we, accordingly, set aside the judgment under challenge.58. the appeal is allowed. there shall be no order as to costs.
b.p. singh, j.1. the three appellants herein were tried by the second additional sessions judge, vidisha, m.p. in sessions trial no. 76 of 1992 charged of offences under section 3(1)(x) of the scheduled castes & scheduled tribes (prevention of atrocities) act, 1989; section 376(2)(g) and section 506 of the indian penal code on the allegation that they had, on march 4, 1992, committed gang rape and criminally intimidated kumari lusia a tribal woman, who was posted as assistant teacher in the primary government school at village bagod. the trial court acquitted them of the charge under the scheduled castes & scheduled tribes (prevention of atrocities) act, 1989 but found them guilty of the offence under section 376(2)(g) of the indian penal code and sentenced them to ten years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of rs. 2,000/- each under that section. it further found them guilty of the offence under section 506 part ii of the indian penal code for which they were sentenced to one year rigorous imprisonment. aggrieved by the judgment and order of the trial court, the appellant malkhansingh preferred criminal appeal no. 49 of 1997 while the other two appellants filed criminal appeal no. 76 of 1997 before the high court of madhya pradesh at jabalpur. the high court by its impugned judgment and order of march 11, 2002 dismissed the appeals. the appellants have preferred these two appeals by special leave.2. the case of the prosecution is that the prosecutrix kumari lusia was working as assistant teacher in the government primary school at village bagod. she was aged about 28 years and was unmarried. on march 4, 1992 at about 11.30 a.m. she boarded a bus to go to bagod and alighted from the bus at about 1.00 p.m. at a place known as zero chain puliya from where her school was located at a distance of about 1 kilometre. after alighting from the bus she proceeded on foot to the school in village bagod. when she was near the tapara of baldar khan she noticed that she was being followed by three persons. when she proceeded some distance she suspected that some of them had come very close to her. she moved to the edge of the path-way giving way to the persons behind her to go ahead. however, one of them, later identified at appellant maharajsingh, caught hold of her hands from behind. the prosecutrix objected and raised an alarm calling out for baldar khan but no one came to her rescue. on the other hand appellant malkhansingh took out a knife and threatened her. appellant musab khan also took out a knife and threatened her into silence. two of them then dragged her towards the canal where she was further threatened and made to lie on the ground. when again she persisted in raising alarm, appellant maharajsingh placed a knife on her neck and tried to press her neck. thereafter the appellants musab khan and malkhansingh removed her clothes and musab khan was the first person to sexually assault her followed by maharajsingh and malkhansingh. thereafter they left her giving threats of dire consequences if she reported the matter to the police and reminded her that she would meet the same fate, which madam rekha had met, if she reported the matter to the police.3. after the occurrence the prosecutrix left for her home at bagod and went to school at about 3.00 p.m. on the next day she attended the school but thereafter went to vidisha accompanied by another teacher mangalsingh. at vidisha she met the deputy director of education, one mr. dutta, on march 6, 1992 to whom she narrated the incident and told him that the three boys were after her life and it was not safe for her to go back to bagod. she requested that she may transferred to some other school. according to the prosecutrix, mr. dutta attached her to a school at khamkheda with effect from march 10, 1992. she narrated the incident to her colleague shri mangalsingh on march 12, 1992, who in turn reported the matter to kaluram, pw.3, who was the president of district teachers association. on march 14, 1992 shri kaluram, pw.3, took her to the residence of superintendent of police, vidisha where the prosecutrix handed over a typed complaint to the superintendent of police. the said complaint was forwarded to the kotwali, vidisha, where a crime was registered. the prosecutrix was thereafter medically examined by dr. manju singhai, pw.1, on the same day at about 6.45 p.m. her clothes were seized and handed over to the police. the vidisha police sent the relevant papers to police station satpada, since village bagod fell within the jurisdiction of that police station. the case was investigated and ultimately musab khan was arrested on march 29, 1992 while the others were arrested on march 26, 1992. the appellants were put up for trial before the additional sessions judge, vidisha, where the prosecutrix identified them as the three persons who had subjected her to sexual assault and criminal intimidation.4. a few facts which may be noticed at the threshold are that the investigating officer did not consider it necessary to hold the test identification parade. surprisingly, the prosecution did not examine its witnesses shri mangal singh and shri dutta, deputy director of education, to whom she had narrated the incident on march 6, 1992. before the trial court as well as before the high court it was urged on behalf of the defence that there was considerable delay in lodging the first information report and therefore not much reliance could be placed upon the testimony of the prosecutrix. it was also urged that the medical evidence on record did not support the case of the prosecution. lastly it was submitted that in the absence of a test identification parade, the identification of the appellants by the prosecutrix before the trial court had no value whatsoever and, therefore, the conviction of the appellants was not justified in law.5. the trial court as well as the high court have carefully considered the evidence on record and have come to the conclusion that the delay, if any, in lodging the first information report was fully explained by the prosecutrix and was strongly supported by the circumstantial evidence on record. the courts below have noticed the fact that the prosecutrix was living all alone and was an unmarried person, about 28 years of age. she did not have any family member to whom she could have narrated her story immediately after the occurrence. moreover the sense of shame coupled with the fear on account of threats given out by the appellants must have deterred her from immediately reporting about the occurrence to others. even so, according to her, she narrated the incident to shri dutta, deputy director of education on march 6, 1992. later she narrated the incident to one of her colleagues whom she found to be sympathetic towards her and thereafter when her cause was taken up by the teachers association, she could muster courage to lodge a report with the superintendent of police. the courts below have, therefore, rightly held that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the mere delay in lodging of the first information report does not discredit the prosecution case. the courts below have also examined the medical evidence on record and have observed that the medical evidence, to some extent, supported the case of the prosecution that the prosecutrix may have been subjected to forcible sexual intercourse within a week or two of her medical examination. the medical evidence also indicted that the prosecutrix was not habituated to sexual intercourse. we find no reason to dis-agree with the findings recorded by the courts below on these aspects of the matter.6. the principal submission urged before the courts below as also before us is whether the conviction of the appellants can be sustained on the basis of the identification of the appellants by the prosecutrix in court without holding a test identification parade in the course of investigation. while the appellants contend that the identification in court not preceded by a test identification parade is of no evidentiary value, the prosecution contends that the substantive evidence is the evidence of identification on court and, therefore, the value to be attached to such identification must depend on facts and circumstances of each case. no general rule could be laid that such identification in the court is of no value.7. it is trite to say that the substantive evidence is the evidence of identification in court. apart from the clear provisions of section 9 of the evidence act, the position in law is well settled by a catena of decisions of this court. the facts, which establish the identity of the accused persons, are relevant under section 9 of the evidence act. as a general rule, the substantive evidence of a witness is the statement made in court. the evidence of mere identification of the accused person at the trial for the first time is from its very nature inherently of a weak character. the purpose of a prior test identification, therefore, is to test and strengthen the trustworthiness of that evidence. it is accordingly considered a safe rule of prudence to generally look for corroboration of the sworn testimony of witnesses in court as to the identity of the accused who are strangers to them, in the form of earlier identification proceedings. this rule of prudence, however, is subject to exceptions, when, for example, the court is impressed by a particular witness on whose testimony it can safely rely, without such or other corroboration. the identification parades belong to the stage of investigation, and there is no provision in the code of criminal procedure, which obliges the investigating agency to hold, or confers a right upon the accused to claim, a test identification parade. they do not constitute substantive evidence and these parades are essentially governed by section 162 of the code of criminal procedure. failure to hold a test identification parade would not make inadmissible the evidence of identification in court. the weight to be attached to such identification should be a matter for the courts of fact. in appropriate cases it may accept the evidence of identification even without insisting on corroboration. (see kanta prashad v. delhi administration : manu/sc/0043/1958manu/sc/0043/1958 : 1958crilj698 ; vaikuntam chandrappa and ors. v. state of andhra pradesh : manu/sc/0224/1959manu/sc/0224/1959 : air1960sc1340 ; budhsen and anr. v. state of u.p. : manu/sc/0103/1970manu/sc/0103/1970 : 1970crilj1149 and rameshwar singh v. state of jammu and kashmir : manu/sc/0174/1971manu/sc/0174/1971 : 1972crilj15 .8. in jadunath singh and anr. v. the state of uttar pradesh : manu/sc/0132/1970manu/sc/0132/1970 : 1971crilj305 the submission that absence of test identification parade in all cases is fatal, was repelled by this court after exhaustive considerations of the authorities on the subject. that was a case where the witnesses had seen the accused over a period of time. the high court had found that the witnesses were independent witnesses having no affinity with deceased and entertained no animosity towards the appellant. they had claimed to have known the appellants for the last 6-7 years as they had been frequently visiting the town of bewar. this court noticed the observations in an earlier unreported decision of this court in parkash chand sogani v. the state of rajasthan : (criminal appeal no. 92 of 1956 decided on january 15, 1957) wherein it was observed:-"it is also the defence case that shiv lal did not know the appellant. but on a reading of the evidence of p.w. 7 it seems to us clear that shiv lal knew the appellant by sight. though he made a mistake about his name by referring to him as kailash chandra, it was within the knowledge of shiv lal that he appellant was a brother of manak chand and he identified him as such. these circumstances are quite enough to show that the absence of the identification parade would not vitiate the evidence. a person, who is well-known by sight as the brother of manak chand, even before the commission of the occurrence, need not be put before an identification parade in order to be marked out. we do not think that there is any justification for the contention that the absence of the identification parade or a mistake made as to his name, would be necessarily fatal to the prosecution case in the circumstances."9. the court concluded:"it seems to us that it has been clearly laid down by this court, in parkash chand sogani v. the state of rajasthan (supra), that the absence of test identification in all cases is not fatal and if the accused person is well-known by sight it would be waste of time to put him up for identification. of course if the prosecution fails to hold an identification on the plea that the witnesses already knew the accused well and it transpires in the course of the trial that the witnesses did not know the accused previously, the prosecution would run the risk of losing its case".10. in harbajan singh v. state of jammu and kashmir : manu/sc/0127/1975manu/sc/0127/1975 : 1975crilj1553 , though a test identification parade was not held, this court upheld the conviction on the basis of the identification in court corroborated by other circumstantial evidence. in that case it was found that that the appellant and one gurmukh singh were absent at the time of roll call and when they were arrested on the night of 16th december, 1971 their rifles smelt of fresh gunpowder and that the empty cartridge case which was found at the scene of offence bore distinctive markings showing that the bullet which killed the deceased was fired from the rifle of the appellant. noticing these circumstances this court held:-"in view of this corroborative evidence we find no substance in the argument urged on behalf of the appellant that the investigating officer ought to have held an identification parade and that the failure of munshi ram to mention the names of the two accused to the neighbours who came to the scene immediately after the occurrence shows that his story cannot be true. as observed by this court in jadunath singh v. state of u.p., absence of test identification is not necessarily fatal. the fact that munshi ram did not disclose the names of the two accused to the villages only shows that the accused were not previously known to him and the story that the accused referred to each other by their respective names during the course of the incident contains an element of exaggeration. the case does not rest on the evidence of munshi ram alone and the corroborative circumstances to which we have referred to above lend enough assurance to the implication of the appellant."11. it is no doubt true that much evidentiary value cannot be attached to the identification of the accused in court where identifying witness is a total stranger who had just a fleeting glimpse of the person identified or who had no particular reason to remember the person concerned, if the identification is made for the first time in court.12. in ram nath mahto v. state of bihar : manu/sc/0630/1996manu/sc/0630/1996 : 1996crilj3585 this court upheld the conviction of the appellant even when the witness while deposing in court did not identify the accused out of fear, though he had identified him in the test identification parade. this court noticed the observations of the trial judge who had recorded his remarks about the demeanour that the witness perhaps was afraid of the accused as he was trembling at the stare of ram nath, accused. this court also relied upon the evidence of the magistrate, pw.7 who had conducted the test identification parade in which the witness had identified the appellant. this court found, that in the circumstances if the courts below had convicted the appellant, there was no reason to interfere.13. in suresh chandra bahri v. state of bihar: manu/sc/0500/1994manu/sc/0500/1994 : 1994crilj3271 this court held that it is well settled that substantive evidence of the witness is his evidence in the court but when the accused person is not previously known to the witness concerned then identification of the accused by the witness soon after his arrest is of great importance because it furnishes an assurance that the investigation is proceeding on right lines in addition to furnishing corroboration of the evidence to be given by the witness later in court at the trial. from this point of view it is a matter of great importance both for the investigating agency and for the accused and a fortiori for the proper administration of justice that such identification is held without avoidable and unreasonable delay after the arrest of the accused. it is an adopting this course alone that justice and fair play can be assured both to the accused as well as to the prosecution. thereafter this court observed:-"but the position may be different when the accused or a culprit who stands trial had been seen not once but for quite a number of times at different point of time and places which fact may do away with the necessity of a ti parade."14. in state of uttar pradesh v. boota singh and ors.: manu/sc/0182/1978manu/sc/0182/1978 : [1979]1scr298 this court observed that the evidence of identification becomes stronger if the witness has an opportunity of seeing the accused not for a few minutes but for some length of time, in broad day light, when he would be able to note the features of the accused more carefully than on seeing the accused in a dark night for a few minutes.15. in ramanbhai naranbhai patel and ors. v. state of gujarat : manu/sc/0744/1999manu/sc/0744/1999 : 1999crilj5013 after considering the earlier decisions this court observed:-"it becomes at once clear that the aforesaid observations were made in the light of the peculiar facts and circumstances wherein the police is said to have given the names of the accused to the witnesses. under these circumstances, identification of such a named accused only in the court when the accused was not known earlier to the witness had to be treated as valueless. the said decision, in turn relied upon an earlier decision of this court in the case of state (delhi admn.) v. v.c. shukla manu/sc/0545/1980manu/sc/0545/1980 : (1980)2scc665 wherein also fazal ali, j. speaking for a three-judge bench made similar observations in this regard. in that case the evidence of the witness in the court and his identifying the accused only in the court without previous identification parade was found to be a valueless exercise. the observations made therein were confined to the nature of the evidence deposed to by the said eyewitnesses. if, therefore, cannot be held, as tried to be submitted by learned counsel for the appellants, that in the absence of a test identification parade, the evidence of an eyewitness parade, the evidence of an eyewitness identifying the accused would become inadmissible or totally useless; whether the evidence deserves any credence or not would always depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. it is, of course, true as submitted by learned counsel for the appellants that the later decisions of this court in the case of rajesh govind jagesha v. state of maharashtra manu/sc/0703/1999manu/sc/0703/1999 : 2000crilj380 and state of h.p. v. lekh raj manu/sc/0714/1999manu/sc/0714/1999 : 2000crilj44 had not considered the aforesaid three-judge bench decisions of this court. however, in our view, the ratio of the aforesaid later decisions of this court cannot be said to be running counter to what is decided by the earlier three-judge bench judgments on the facts and circumstances examined by the court while rendering these decisions. but even assuming as submitted by learned counsel for the appellants that the evidence of these two injured witnesses i.e. bhogilal ranchhodbhai and karsanbhai vallabhabhai identifying the accused in the court may be treated to be of no assistance to the prosecution, the fact remains that these eyewitnesses were seriously injured and they could have easily seen the faces of the persons assaulting them and their appearance and identity would well remain imprinted in their minds especially when they were assaulted in broad daylight. they could not be said to be interested in roping in innocent persons by shielding the real accused who had assaulted them."16. in the light of the principle laid down by this court we may now examine the facts of this case.17. it is well settled that the substantive evidence is the evidence of identification in court and the test identification parade provides corroboration to the identification of the witness in court, if required. however, what weight must be attached to the evidence of identification in court, which is not preceded by a test identification parade, is a matter for the courts of fact to examine. in the instant case the courts below have concurrently found the evidence of the prosecutrix to be reliable and, therefore, there was no need for the corroboration of her evidence in court as she was found to be implicitly reliable. we find no error in the reasoning of the courts below. from the facts of the case it is quite apparent that the prosecutrix did not even know the appellants and did not make any effort to falsely implicate them by naming them at any stage. the crime was perpetrated in broad daylight. the prosecutrix had sufficient opportunity to observe the features of the appellants who raped her one after the other. before the rape was committed, she was threatened and intimated by the appellants. after the rape was committed, she was again threatened and intimidated by them. all this must have taken time. this is not a case where the identifying witness had only a fleeting glimpse of the appellants on a dark night. she also had a reason to remember their cases as they had committed a heinous offence and put her to shame. she had, therefore, abundant opportunity to notice their features. in fact on account of her traumatic and tragic experience, the faces of the appellants must be got imprinted in her memory, and there was no chance of her making a mistake about their identify. the occurrence took place on march 4, 1992 and she deposed in court on august 217, 1992. the prosecutrix appears to be a witness on whom implicit reliance can be placed and there is no reason why she should falsely identify the appellants as the perpetrators of the crime if they had not actually committed the offence. in these circumstances if the courts below have concurrently held that the identification of the appellants by the prosecutrix in court does not require further corroboration, we find no reason to interfere with the finding recorded by the courts below after an appreciation of the evidence on record.18. we, therefore, find no merit in these appeals and the same are accordingly dismissed.
s.b. sinha, j.1. leave granted.2. interpretation of order 18 rules 4 and 5 of the code of civil procedure falls for consideration in this appeal which arises out of a judgment and order dated 3.7.2003 passed by the high court of judicature at bombay in w.p. no. 2428/2003.3. the said question arises in the following circumstances.4. the respondent herein filed the suit no. 156/169 of 2001 in the court of small cause bombay against the appellant for eviction of the appellant inter alia on the ground that the provisions of maharashtra rent control act, 1999 had no application in relation to the premises in question. an affidavit was filed by the respondent herein purporting to be his examination-in-chief to be taken on evidence in the suit.5. an application was filed by the appellant herein objecting to the said affidavit being accepted inter alia on the ground that the decree which may be passed in suit being, an appealable one, order 18 rule 5 of the code of civil procedure will be applicable. by reason of an order dated 17th february, 2003, the learned trial judge rejected the said application of the appellant holding:"the court had already acted upon as per the provisions of order 18 rule 4 of c.p.c. (amended) which authorizes the court to receive the evidence on affidavit in any matter which includes the appealable order. in the given circumstances the affidavit need not be returned back to plaintiffs and be asked to give oral evidence in the matter.besides the fact that aspect as above, and the legal position observed by me. i have also come across one matter of this court only wherein on same facts the matter had been taken to the hon'ble high court and the hon'ble high court had directed this court to accept the evidence on affidavit. i have also come across certain observations made by the small causes court supporting the view that it is legal to accept evidence on affidavit in any, matter. hence i do not think i should discuss all the authorities cited by defendants advocate. hence i proceed to pass following order.orderapplication stands rejected. matter is adjourned to 4.3.2002 at 10.30 a.m. for cross examination of plaintiffs."6. being aggrieved the appellant preferred a writ petition there against which was dismissed by reason of the impugned order holding :"heard. the only grievance made in this petition is that the court below has allowed the plaintiff to receive evidence on affidavit. learned counsel contends that, that will not be permissible in view of the provisions contained in order xviii rule 5 of the code of civil procedure. i am not inclined to interfere with the discretionary order passed by the court below. besides, i find force in the objection taken on behalf of the respondents that the issue is already concluded and answered by the decision of this court dated 20th march, 2003 in writ petition no. 708 of 2003. to my mind, no prejudice will be caused to the petitioner, if the view as taken by the trial court was to be upheld because the petitioner being defendant would get opportunity to cross-examine the plaintiff and plaintiff's witnesses.hence, no reason to interfere. rejected."7. the appellant is in appeal before us aggrieved thereby.8. mr. rajan narain, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant would submit that order 18 rule 4 and order 18 rule 5 of the code of civil procedure should be read harmoniously and so read, it must be held that order 18 rule 4 will have no application in the appealable cases; and as logical corollary thereof the court must examine all the witnesses in court. in support of the said contention, strong reliance has been placed on laxman das v. deoji mal and ors. manu/rh/0566/2002manu/rh/0566/2002.9. mr. nariman, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, on the other hand, would submit that a bare perusal of the provisions contained in order 18 rule 4 of the code of civil procedure would show that an affidavit incorporating examination-in-chief of a witness has to be filed in every case and only in the event the said witness is required to be cross-examined, he would be produced in court.10. the learned counsel would urge that the code of civil procedure amendment act, 1978 was enacted with a view to do away with the unnecessary wastage of time which may be taken for examination of a witness.11. mr. nariman would urge that order 18 rule 5 should be read with order is rule 13 so as to decipher the difference between the cases where an appeal is allowed and where appeal is not allowed. order 18 rule 5, the learned counsel would submit, merely lays down the procedure for taking the evidence of the witness. in support of the said contention, reliance has been placed on f.d.c. ltd. v. federation of medical representatives association india (fmrai) and ors. manu/mh/0038/2003manu/mh/0038/2003 : air2003bom371 .12. order 18 rule 4 as it originally stood reads as under:"4 witnesses to be examined in open court.the evidence of the witnesses in attendance shall be taken orally in open court in the presence and under the personal direction and superintendence of the judge."13. order 18 rules 4 (1), (2), and (3) as they now stand read, as under:"4. recording of evidence.-(1) in every case, the examination-in-chief of a witness shall be on affidavit and copies thereof shall be supplied to the opposite party by the party who calls him for evidence.provided that where documents are filed and the parties rely upon the documents, the proof and admissibility of such documents which are filed along with affidavit shall be subject to the orders of the court.(2) the evidence (cross-examination and re-examination) of the witness in attendance, whose evidence (examination- in-chief) by affidavit has been furnished to the court shall be taken either by the court or by the commissioner appointed by it :provided that the court may, while appointing a commission under this sub- rule, consider taking into account such relevant factors as it thinks fit.(3) "the court or the commissioner, as the case may be, shall record evidence either in writing or mechanically in the presence of the judge or of the commissioner, as the case may be, and where such evidence is recorded by the commissioner he shall return such evidence together with his report in writing signed by him to the court appointing him and the evidence taken under it shall form part of the record of the suit."14. the other sub-rules of rule a of order 18 provide for other and further procedures as regard examination of witness.15. rule 5 refers to the evidence which is required to be taken in cases where the appeal is allowed in contra- distinction with the cases where appeal is not allowed as envisaged in rule 13 of order 18 of the code of civil procedure. rule 5, therefore, envisages a situation where the court is required to take down an evidence in the manner laid down therein which would mean that where cross- examination or re-examination of the witness is to take place in the court.16. the examination of a witness would include evidence-in- chief, cross-examination or re-examination. rule 4 of order 18 speaks of examination-in-chief. the unamended rule provided for the manner in which 'evidence' is to be taken. such examination-in-chief of a witness in every case shall be on affidavit.17. the aforementioned provision has been made to curtail the time taken by the court in examining a witness in chief. sub-rule (2) of rule 4 of order 18 of code of civil procedure provides for cross-examination and re-examination of a witness which shall be taken by the court or the commissioner appointed by it.18. we may notice that rule 4 of order 18 was amended with effect from 1.7.2002 specifically provided thereunder that the examination-in-chief in every case shall be on affidavit. rule 5 of order 18 had been incorporated even prior to the said amendment.19. rule 4 of order 18 does not make any distinction between an appealable and non-appealable cases so far mode of recording evidence is concerned. such a difference is to be found only in rules 5 and 13 of order 18 of the code.20. it, therefore, appears that whereas under, the unamended rule, the entire evidence was required to be adduced in court, now the examination in chief of a witness including the party to a suit is to be tendered on affidavit. the expressions "in every case" are significant. what, thus, remains, viz. cross-examination or re- examination in the expellable cases will have to be considered in the manner laid down in the rules, subject to the other sub-rules of rule 4.21. rule 5 of order 18 speaks of the other formalities which are required to be complied with in the cases, however, where an appeal is not allowed, the procedures laid down in rule 5 are not required to be followed.22. in a situation of this nature, the doctrine of suppression of mischief rule as adumbrated in heydon's case [3 co rep 7a, 76 er 637] shall apply. such an amendment was made by the parliament consciously and, thus, full effect thereto must be given.23. in halsbury's laws of england, volume 44(1), fourth reissue, para 1474, pp 906-07, it is stated :"parliament intends that an 'enactment shall remedy a particular mischief and it is therefore presumed that parliament intends that the court, when considering, in relation to the facts of the instant case, which of the opposing constructions of the enactment corresponds to its legal meaning, should find a construction which applies the remedy provided by it in such a way as to suppress that mischief. the doctrine originates in heydon's case where the barons of the exchequer resolved that for the sure and true interpretation of all statutes in general (be they penal or beneficial, restrictive or enlarging of the common law), four things are to be discerned and considered :(1) what was the common law before the making of the act;(2) what was the mischief and defect for which the common law did not provide;(3) what remedy parliament has resolved and appointed to cure the disease of the commonwealth; and(4) the true reason of the remedy, end then the office of all the judges is always to make such construction as shall(a) suppress the mischief and advance the remedy; and(b) suppress subtle inventions and evasions for the continuance of the mischief pro private- commode (for private benefit); and(c) add force and life to the cure and remedy according to the true intent of the makers of the act pro publico (for the public good)."24. heydon's rule has been applied by this court in a large number of cases in order to suppress the mischief which was intended to be remedied as against the literal rule which could have otherwise covered the field. [see for example, smt. pek kaillani amma and ors. v. k. devi and ors. manu/sc/0487/1996manu/sc/0487/1996 : air1996sc1963 ; bengal immunity co. ltd. v. state of bihar and ors. , manu/sc/0083/1955manu/sc/0083/1955 : [1955]2scr603 ; and goodyear india ltd. v. state of haryana and anr. , manu/sc/0194/1989manu/sc/0194/1989 : [1991]188itr402(sc) .].25. it is now well-settled that for the purpose of interpretation of statute the same has to be in its entirety.26. furthermore, in a case of this nature, principles of purposive construction must come into play. (see indian handicrafts emporium v. union of india manu/sc/0640/2003manu/sc/0640/2003 : air2003sc3240 ).27. in chief justice of a.p. v. l.v.a. dikshitulu manu/sc/0416/1978manu/sc/0416/1978 : [1979]1scr26 , this court observed:"the primary principle of interpretation is that a constitutional or statutory provision should be construed "according to the intent of they that made it" (coke). normally, such intent is gathered from the language of the provision. if the language, or the phraseology employed by the legislation is precise and plain and thus by itself proclaims the legislative intent in unequivocal terms, the same must be given effect to, regardless of the consequences that may follow. but if the words used in the provision are imprecise, protean or evocative or can reasonably bear meanings more than one, the rule of strict grammatical construction ceases to be a sure guide to reach at the real legislative intent. in such a case, in order to ascertain the true meaning of the terms and phrases employed, it is legitimate for the court to go beyond the arid literal confines of the provision and to call in aid other well-recognised rules of construction, such as its legislative history, the basic scheme and framework of the statute as a whole, each portion throwing light, on the rest, the purpose of the legislation, the object sought to be achieved, and the consequences that may flow from the adoption of one in preference to the other possible interpretation.28. in kehar singh v. state (delhi admn.) manu/sc/0241/1988manu/sc/0241/1988 : 1989crilj1 , this court held:"...but, if the words are ambiguous, uncertain or any doubt arises as to the terms employed, we deem it as our paramount duty to put upon the language of the legislature rational meaning. we then examine every word, every section and every provision. we examine the act as a whole. we examine the necessity which gave rise to the act. we look at the mischiefs which the legislature intended to redress. we look at the whole situation and not just one-to-one relation. we will not consider any provision out of the framework of the statute. we will not view the provisions as abstract principles separated from the motive force, behind. we will consider the provisions in the circumstances to which they owe their origin. we will consider the provisions to ensure coherence and consistency within the law as a whole and to avoid undesirable consequences."29. in district mining officer v. tata iron & steel co. manu/sc/0412/2001manu/sc/0412/2001 : (2001)7scc358 , this court stated:"the legislation is primarily directed to the problems before the legislature based on information derived from past and present experience. it may also be designed by us a of general words to cover similar problems arising in future. but, from the very nature of things, it is impossible to anticipate fully in the varied situations arising in future in which the application of the legislation in hand may be called for and words chosen to communicate such indefinite referents are bound to be in many cases, lacking in clarity and precision and thus giving rise to controversial questions of construction. the process of construction combines both literal and purposive approaches. in other words, the legislative intention i.e. the true or legal meaning of an enactment is derived by considering the meaning of the words used in the enactment in the light of any discernible purpose or object which comprehends the mischief and its remedy to which the enactment is directed."30. in east india hotel ltd. v. union of india manu/sc/0707/2000manu/sc/0707/2000 : 2000(7)scale564 this court observed:"an act has to be read as a whole, the different provisions have to be harmonized and the effect has to be given to all of them."31. in laxman das (supra) the rajasthan high court held:"therefore, in view of the above, the words "in every case", contained in rule 4 of order 18 have to be understood in a limited sense that every case wherein the ultimate order is not appealable, and by no means, it can take in its ambit the orders which would be appealable. in view of above, the position which emerges is that in cases where the final orders to be passed by the court would not be appealable, the discretion has been conferred upon the court to accept the examination-in-chief in the form of affidavit as provided under order 18, rule 4; or to record the substance thereof by the court itself as provided under order 18, rule 13. but in cases where orders would be appealable, the evidence is to be recorded strictly as provided under order 18, rule 5."32. on the other hand, in f.d.c. ltd. (supra) it has been held:"the harmonious reading of rules 4 and 5 of order xviii would reveal that while in each and every case of recording of evidence, the examination-in-chief is to be permitted in the form of affidavit and while such evidence in the form of affidavit being taken on record, the procedure described under rule 5 is to be followed in the appealable cases. in non-appealable cases, the affidavit can be taken on record by taking resort to the provisions of law contained in rule 13 of order xviii. in other words, mere production of the affidavit by the witness will empower the court to take such affidavit on record as forming part of the evidence by recording the memorandum in respect of production of such affidavit taking resort to rule 13 of order xviii in all cases except in the appealable cases wherein it will be necessary for the court to record evidence of production of the affidavit in respect of examination-in-chief by asking the deponent to produce such affidavit in accordance with rule 5 of order xviii. undoubtedly, in both the cases, for the purpose of cross- examination, the court has to follow the procedure prescribed under sub-rule (2) of rule 4 read with rule 13 in case of non- appealable cases and the procedure prescribed under sub-rule (2) of rule 4 read with rule 5 in appealable cases.in other words, in the appealable cases though the examination-in-chief of a witness is permissible to be produced in the form of affidavit, such affidavit cannot be ordered to form part of the evidence unless the deponent thereof enters the witness box and confirms that the contents of the affidavit are as per his say and the affidavit is under his signature and this statement being made on oath to be recorded by following the procedure prescribed under rule 5. in non- appealable cases, however, the affidavit in relation to examination-in-chief of a witness can be taken on record as forming part of the evidence by recording memorandum of production of such affidavit by taking resort to rule 13 of order xviii. the cross-examination of such deponent in case of appealable cases, will have to be recorded by complying the provisions of rule 5, where as in case of non-appealable cases the court would be empowered to exercise its power under rule 13"33. we agree with the view of the bombay high court.34. the matter may be considered from another angle. presence of a party during examination-in-chief is not imperative. if any objection is taken to any statement made in the affidavit, as for example, that a statement has been made beyond the pleadings, such an objection can always be taken before the court in writing and in any event, the attention of the witness can always be drawn while cross-examination him. the defendant would not be prejudiced in any manner whatsoever the examination-in-chief is taken on an affidavit and in the event, he desires to cross-examine the said witness he would be permitted to do so in the open court. there may be cases where a party may not feel the necessity of cross-examining a witness, examined on behalf of the other side. the time of the court would not be wasted in examining such witness in open court.35. applying the aforementioned principles of interpretation of statute, we have no doubt in our mind that order 18 rules 4 and 5 are required to be harmoniously construed. both the provisions are required to be given effect to and as order 18 rule 6 cannot be read as an exception to order 18 rule 4.36. for the reasons aforementioned there is no merit in this appeal, which is dismissed accordingly. however, there shall be no order as to costs.
s/orders passed by the high courts in writ petitions filed as pildisposition:petition dismissedciting reference:discussed1case note:contempt of court - violation of directions contained in judgment - contempt petition - under sections 2(3) and 15 - contempt of court act, 1971 - read with article 129 of constitution of india - alleged violation of directions - contained in judgment and order passed by this court - court passed certain directions - alleged - state government issued forest clearance - contempt of judgment of this court - whether the alleged contemnors nos. 1 and 2 could be said to have committed any violation of the directions contained in judgment and order passed by this courtfacts:this contempt petition under sections 2(3) and 15 of the contempt of court act, 1971 read with article 129 of the constitution of india alleges violation of directions contained in judgment and order passed by this court in alaknanda hydro power co. limited v. anuj joshi and ors. four persons were arrayed as alleged contemnors in this petition. however, during the course of arguments, the petitioners gave up their case against alleged contemnor nos. 3 and 4. this court was also satisfied that no case was made out against them and as such the proceedings against them were dropped. the court, therefore, confined itself in respect of alleged act of contempt on part of alleged contemnor nos. 1 and 2.in its judgment and order dated 13.08.2013 this court had passed certain directions. it is alleged that petitioner came to know that forest land for vishnugad-pipalkoti project has been transferred to tehri hydro development corporation (thdc). the current status of the project as displayed on website of thdc states that "g.o. by gouk for transfer of 80.507 ha of forest land has been issued vide letter dated 6th december, 2013." according to news report dated 23.12.2013 work contract for the construction of vishnugad-pipalkoti projects has been awarded recently. these activities can be undertaken only after government of uttarakhand issues forest clearance. the petitioner has sent right to information request for copies of forest clearance regarding vishnugad-pipalkoti and kotlibhel 1a to respondents nos. 1, 2 and 3 on 26.2.2013 which remain unreplied on the date of filing this petition. though stage 1 and stage 2 forest clearances were issued to the vishnugad-pipalkoti project before 13.08.2013, however, state government appears to have issued forest clearance after 13.08.2013 which is in contempt of the judgment of this hon'ble court. held, while dismissing the petition1.the court perused the record and heard shri bharat jhunjhuwala, applicant no. 2 in support of the petition and mr. amarendran saran and mr. mohan parasaran, learned counsel for the respondents. the letter dated 06.12.2013 from additional secretary, uttarakhand has simply communicated the conditions stipulated in the approval dated 28.05.2013. the approval was well before the judgment and order dated 13.08.2013. plainly, the letter dated 06.12.2013 has not taken any decision after 13.08.2013 but has merely communicated the decision taken well before 13.08.2013. there is thus no violation of any of the directions contained in para 51 of the judgment and order dated 13.08.2013. further, the alleged contemnor no. 1 has simply received the communication dated 06.12.2013, while copy of that communication was marked to general manager, tehri hydro development corporation ltd. in court's view, the alleged contemnors nos. 1 and 2 could not be said to have committed any violation of the directions contained in judgment and order dated 13.08.2013.[6]2.the court, therefore, dismissed the contempt petition.[7]
v. gopala gowda, j.1. leave granted.2. these appeals have been filed by the appellants against the final judgment and order dated 22.02.2013 passed by the high court of madhya pradesh at jabalpur in m.a. no. 480 of 2008, wherein the high court partly allowed the appeal of the appellants and dismissed the review petition no. 256 of 2013 dated 21.6.2013.3. the necessary relevant facts are stated hereunder to appreciate the case with a view to determine whether the appellants are entitled for enhancement of compensation amount as prayed in these appeals?4. on 27.11.2006, jhabbu verman, aged 35 years, was on his way back from tripuri to garha (jabalpur) on his motorcycle bearing registration no. mp-20-y-7669 and met with an accident when a truck bearing registration no. mp-20-ga-2221 being driven by respondent no. 1 rashly and negligently collided with the back of his motorcycle. as a result of the same, jhabbu verman fell towards his right and the wheel of the vehicle ran over his hands which lead to severe damage to his left hand. due to the grievous injuries caused in the said accident, he was immediately taken to the mahakaushal college and hospital and he remained under medical treatment from 28.11.2006, during which period he underwent an operation and plastic surgery twice on his chest and was advised for amputation of his left hand. however, due to the severity of injuries caused to him in the accident, jhambu verman died on 08.12.2006.5. a claim petition under section 166 of the motor vehicle act, 1988 was filed on 06.01.2007 before the motor accidents claims tribunal (for short 'the tribunal'), at jabalpur, m.p. by the appellant no. 1- wife of the deceased, appellant nos. 2 & 3-minor children of the deceased, appellant nos. 4 & 5-parents of the deceased, claiming rs. 31,70,000/- as compensation for loss caused due to the death of jhambu verman.6. the tribunal after considering the facts, circumstances and evidence on record of the case on hand, passed an award dated 08.10.2007 by awarding a total compensation of rs. 3,75,500/- at an interest rate of 6.5% per annum to the appellants.7. aggrieved by the insufficient compensation awarded by the tribunal in its award, the appellants preferred an appeal before the high court of madhya pradesh at jabalpur for enhancement of compensation urging various grounds. the high court after examining the facts, circumstances and evidence on record enhanced the amount to a total compensation of rs. 5,35,000/- under all heads with interest at the rate of 8% per annum. the following is the breakup of compensation under various heads awarded by the high court:the appellants filed a review petition before the high court which was dismissed on 21.06.2013. the appellants have challenged both the orders by filing special leave for enhancement of the compensation amount.8. it has been contended by the learned counsel for the appellants that the high court has wrongly assessed the monthly salary at rs. 3,500/- per month and failed to appreciate that the deceased was 35 years of age and was working as a technician at mahakaushal hospital and that he was getting a salary of rs. 4617/- per month. further, it is contended that the high court failed to appreciate that rajnikant tiwari (pw-3), occupation manager, mahakaushal hospital, jabalpur, has stated that the deceased was an operation theatre technician at the hospital and was getting a salary of rs. 4,600/- per month. further, the courts below failed to consider the legal principles laid down by this court with respect to calculation of future prospects of income of the deceased in the case of sarla verma v. dtc manu/sc/0606/2009manu/sc/0606/2009 : (2009) 6 scc 121, according to which case 50% of the actual salary is to be added to the income of the deceased if he is in a permanent job and below the age of 40 years. therefore, it is contended that on applying the said principles laid down by this court in the above said case, the income of the deceased for calculation of loss of dependency should be taken at rs. 6,900/- [rs. 4,600/- + 50% of rs. 4,600/-].9. it is further contended by him that the deduction towards personal and living expenses of the deceased should be one-fourth by applying the law laid down in sarla verma (supra) and not one-third as taken by the courts below.10. it is further contended by him that the high court has failed to appreciate that the wife of the deceased spent about rs. 1,40,000/- on medical treatment of her husband (deceased) and bills for rs. 1,23,630/- for treatment have been produced in support of the same.11. on the other hand, it has been contended by the learned counsel for the respondent no. 3-insurance company that the high court already enhanced the just and reasonable compensation after examining the facts and circumstances of the case and evidence on record and therefore, submitted that the appellants are not entitled for further enhancement of compensation as claimed in these appeals.12. it is further contended by the learned counsel on behalf of the insurance company that the high court has rightly upheld the observation made by the tribunal that no cogent evidence has been adduced to prove that the deceased was in a permanent job and was getting salary of rs. 4,617/- per month.13. further, it is contended by him that the tribunal has rightly disbelieved the bills of rs. 1,23,630/- as ex. p11 alleged to be spent on the treatment of deceased and the same has been duly considered by the high court. hence, the impugned judgment does not require interference by this court.14. we have heard the learned counsel for both the parties and also examined the facts and circumstances of the case and the evidence on record.15. we are of the considered view that the courts below have erred in the calculation of loss of dependency by wrongly ascertaining the income of the deceased at the time of his death. it is clear that the deceased at the time of his death was working in the operation theatre as a technician in the permanent post at the hospital and was earning rs. 4,617/- per month (rounded off to rs. 4,600/-). on applying the principles as laid down in the case of sarla verma (supra), 50% of the salary must be added to the income of the deceased towards future prospects of income, which comes to rs. 6,900/- per month, i.e. rs. 82,800/- per annum. deducting 1/4th for personal expenses and applying the appropriate multiplier taking into consideration the age of the deceased at the time of his death as per sarla verma (supra), the total loss of dependency comes to rs. 9,93,600/- [(rs. 82,800/- (-) 1/4 x rs. 82,800/-) x 16].16. further, rs. 1,40,000/- was spent by the appellant-wife for medical purposes of her husband (deceased) during the period of treatment before his death. accordingly, we award an amount of rs. 1,40,000/- towards medical expenses incurred for the treatment of the deceased.17. further, the high court has erred in awarding only rs. 5,000/- each towards loss of estate, funeral expenses and loss of consortium. we award rs. 1,00,000/- towards loss of estate according to the principles laid down in the case of kalpanaraj and ors. v. tamil nadu state transport corporation manu/sc/0345/2014manu/sc/0345/2014 : 2014 (5) scale 479, rs. 25,000/- towards funeral expenses and rs. 1,00,000/- towards loss of consortium as per the principles laid down by this court in the case of rajesh and ors. v. rajbir singh and ors. manu/sc/0480/2013manu/sc/0480/2013 : (2013) 9 scc 54.18. further, we award rs. 1,00,000/- each to the appellant-children towards loss of love and affection due to the loss of their father (deceased) as per the decision of this court in the case of juju kuruvila and ors. v. kunjujamma mohan and ors. manu/sc/0615/2013manu/sc/0615/2013 : (2013) 9 scc 166. further, a sum of rs. 50,000/- is awarded to each of the appellant-parents towards loss of love and affection of their deceased son as per the principles laid down by this court in the case of m. mansoor and anr. v. united india insurance co. ltd. manu/sc/1042/2013manu/sc/1042/2013 : 2013 (12) scale 324.19. further, the high court has erred in awarding an interest at the rate of 8% per annum only, instead of 9% per annum on the compensation amount as per the principles laid by this court in the case of municipal corporation of delhi v. association of victims of uphaar tragedy manu/sc/1255/2011manu/sc/1255/2011 : (2011) 14 scc 481. we accordingly award an interest at the rate of 9% per annum on the compensation amount.20. in the result, the appellant shall be entitled to compensation under the following heads:21. further, though all the appellants are legally entitled for equal share of rs. 1,98,720/- (rs. 9,93,600/- divided by 5) each out of the compensation awarded towards loss of dependency, however, by keeping in mind the age of the parents of the deceased and also the future educational requirements of the minor-children of the deceased, we are of the view that the parents of the deceased shall be entitled to 1 lakh each out of the total compensation amount awarded towards loss of dependency and the remaining part of their share (i.e. rs. 98,720/- each) shall be equally divided and added to the appellant-minors' share of compensation. therefore the following is the apportionment of the amount awarded towards loss of dependency of the appellants with proportionate interest:thus, the total compensation payable to the appellants by the respondent-insurance company will be rs. 16,58,600/- with interest at the rate of 9% p.a. from the date of filing of the application till the date of payment. the respondent-insurance company is directed to deposit the sum payable to the appellant-children with proportionate interest awarded by this court in fixed deposit in any nationalised bank as per the preference of appellant-no. 1/guardian till the appellant nos. 2 and 3 attain majority with the liberty to the mother/guardian to withdraw interest & such amounts for their education, development and welfare by filing the appropriate application before the motor accidents claims tribunal, jabalpur. the respondent-insurance company shall either pay the remaining compensation amount by way of demand-draft in favour of the appellant nos. 1, 4 and 5 or deposit the same with interest as awarded before the motor accidents claims tribunal, jabalpur, after deducting the amount already paid to the appellants, if any, within six weeks from the date of receipt of the copy of this judgment.the appeals are allowed as per the above said directions. no costs.22. hon'ble mr. justice v. gopala gowda pronounced the judgment of the bench comprising his lordship and hon'ble mr. justice c. nagappan.23. leave granted.24. the appeals are allowed in terms of the signed non-reportable judgment.
a.k. goel, j.1. leave granted. the issue raised for consideration in these appeals is whether recall of witnesses, at the stage when statement of accused under section 313 of the code of criminal procedure ("code of criminal procedure") has been recorded, could be allowed on the plea that the defence counsel was not competent and had not effectively cross-examined the witnesses, having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case.2. facts relevant for deciding the issue lie in a narrow compass. on 6th december, 2014, a first information report was lodged alleging that the respondent accused who was the driver of cab no. dl-1yd-7910, swift dzire, hired by the victim on 5th december, 2014 for returning home from her office committed rape on her. the statement of the prosecutrix was recorded under section 164 code of criminal procedure on 8th december, 2014. after investigation, charge sheet was filed before the magistrate on 24th december, 2014. since the accused was not represented by counsel, he was provided legal aid counsel. thereafter on 2nd january, 2015, the accused engaged his private counsel m/s. alok kumar dubey and ankit bhatia in place of the legal aid counsel. thereafter, the case was committed to the court of session. charges were framed on 13th january, 2015. prosecution evidence commenced on 15th january, 2015 and was closed on 31st january, 2015. the witnesses were duly cross-examined by the counsel engaged by the accused. statement of the accused under section 313 code of criminal procedure was recorded on 3rd february, 2015. on 4th february, 2015, an application for recall of prosecutrix pw2 and formal witness pw-23 who booked the cab was made, but the same was rejected and the said order was never challenged. thereafter, on 9th february, 2015, the accused engaged another counsel, who filed another application under section 311 code of criminal procedure for recall of all the 28 prosecution witnesses on 16th february, 2015. the said application was dismissed on 18th february by the trial court but the same was allowed by the high court vide impugned order dated 4th march, 2015 in a petition filed under article 227 of the constitution of india read with section 482 code of criminal procedure. even though the specific grounds urged in the application were duly considered and rejected, it was observed that recall of certain witnesses was deemed proper for ensuring fair trial.3. aggrieved by the order of the high court, the victim as well as the state have moved this court.4. on 10th march, 2015, when the matter came up for hearing before this court, stay of further proceedings was granted but since the prosecutrix had already been recalled in pursuance of the impugned order and further cross-examined, the said deposition was directed to be kept in the sealed cover and publication thereof by anyone in possession thereof was restrained.5. we have heard learned attorney general appearing for the state, shri colin gonsalves, learned senior counsel appearing for the victim and shri d.k. mishra, learned counsel appearing for the accused.6. learned attorney general submitted that the view taken by the high court was erroneous and true scope of power of recall has not been appreciated. firstly, though the power of recall is very wide and could be exercised at any stage, it could not be exercised mechanically, without just and adequate grounds. at the end of the trial, exercise of such power was permissible only in exceptional situations. once trial is conducted by a counsel, another counsel could not seek retrial or recall of all the witnesses merely by alleging that the previous counsel was not competent. at any rate, the court permitting such a course must record cogent reasons. secondly, harassment of the victim on being recalled for cross-examination was a relevant factor which was required to be taken into account. thirdly, expeditious trial in a heinous offence was another factor which was required to be taken into account. in this case, a further factor which the impugned order ignores is that the respondent was not facing a criminal case for the first time. he was facing three cases of rape earlier and was well conversant with the legal matters. he had made his own informed choice in appointing a counsel. interference by the high court was permissible only when the view taken by the trial court declining prayer for recall was found to be perverse or unjust. it was further pointed out that the conclusion recorded by the high court was contrary to the findings in the order rejecting various grounds raised in support of prayer for recall. learned attorney general made reference to decisions of this court in rajaram prasad yadav v. state of bihar manu/sc/0663/2013manu/sc/0663/2013 : (2013) 14 scc 461, mannan sk v. state of west bengal manu/sc/0568/2014manu/sc/0568/2014 : (2014) 13 scc 59, p. sanjeeva rao v. state of a.p. manu/sc/0504/2012manu/sc/0504/2012 : (2012) 7 scc 56, state of punjab v. gurmit singh manu/sc/0366/1996manu/sc/0366/1996 : (1996) 2 scc 384, state of karnataka v. shivanna manu/sc/0400/2014manu/sc/0400/2014 : (2014) 8 scc 916, hofman andreas v. inspector of customs manu/sc/1505/1999manu/sc/1505/1999 : (2000) 10 scc 430, dayal singh v. state of uttaranchal manu/sc/0622/2012manu/sc/0622/2012 : (2012) 8 scc 263, devender pal singh v. state (nct of delhi) manu/sc/0217/2002manu/sc/0217/2002 : (2002) 5 scc 234, nhrc v. state of gujarat (2009) 6 scc 767, swaran singh v. state of punjab manu/sc/0320/2000manu/sc/0320/2000 : (2000) 5 scc 668.7. shri gonsalves, learned senior counsel adopted the submissions of learned attorney general and further submitted that the high court appears to have been impressed by the fact that the accused was in custody and thus had no reason to delay the trial. a presumption that an accused in custody will not delay the trial was not well founded and could not be a valid consideration for retrial or recall of prosecutrix and other witnesses. the prosecutrix had already faced court proceedings while recording her statement under section 164 code of criminal procedure and while facing cross-examination for three days. he also placed reliance on p. ramachandra rao v. state of karnataka manu/sc/0328/2002manu/sc/0328/2002 : (2002) 4 scc 578, delhi domestic working women' forum v. union of india manu/sc/0519/1995manu/sc/0519/1995 : (1995) 1 scc 14, natasha singh v. cbi manu/sc/0483/2013manu/sc/0483/2013 : (2013) 5 scc 741, mohanlal shamji soni v. union of india manu/sc/0318/1991manu/sc/0318/1991 : (1991) supp. 1 scc 271, zahira habibulla h. sheikh v. state of gujarat manu/sc/0322/2004manu/sc/0322/2004 : (2004) 4 scc 158, sister mina lalita baruwa v. state of orissa manu/sc/1265/2013manu/sc/1265/2013 : (2013) 16 scc 173, raminder singh v. state crl. m.c. 8479/2006 and crl. m.a. 14359/2006, decided on 20.02.2008 (delhi h.c.)., rama paswan v. state of jharkhand manu/sc/1945/2007manu/sc/1945/2007 : (2007) 11 scc 191, nisar khan v. state of uttaranchal manu/sc/2296/2006manu/sc/2296/2006 : (2006) 9 scc 386, hussainara khatoon (i) v. home secy. state of bihar manu/sc/0119/1979manu/sc/0119/1979 : (1980) 1 scc 81 and vijay kumar v. state of u.p. manu/sc/0891/2011manu/sc/0891/2011 : (2011) 8 scc 136.8. learned counsel for the respondent-accused supported the impugned order and submitted that though the previous counsel had cross-examined the witnesses, he had not asked relevant questions nor given suggestions which were required to be given. he placed reliance on kishore chand v. state of himachal pradesh manu/sc/0374/1990manu/sc/0374/1990 : (1991) 1 scc 286, hardeep singh v. state of punjab manu/sc/4976/2008manu/sc/4976/2008 : (2009) 16 scc 785, ram chander v. state of haryana manu/sc/0206/1981manu/sc/0206/1981 : (1981) 3 scc 191, state of rajasthan v. ani @ hanif manu/sc/0233/1997manu/sc/0233/1997 : (1997) 6 scc 162, ritesh tewari v. state of u.p. manu/sc/0742/2010manu/sc/0742/2010 : (2010) 10 scc 677, maria margarida sequeria fernandes v. erasmo jack de sequeria (dead) through l.rs. manu/sc/0225/2012manu/sc/0225/2012 : (2012) 5 scc 370, rajeshwar prosad misra v. state of west bengal manu/sc/0080/1965manu/sc/0080/1965 : (1966) 1 scr 178, jamatraj kewalji govani v. the state of maharashtra manu/sc/0063/1967manu/sc/0063/1967 : (1967) 3 scr 415, raghunandan v. state of u.p. manu/sc/0187/1974manu/sc/0187/1974 : (1974) 4 scc 186, shailendra kumar v. state of bihar manu/sc/0757/2001manu/sc/0757/2001 : (2002) 1 scc 655, satyajit banerjee v. state of west bengal manu/sc/0997/2004manu/sc/0997/2004 : (2005) 1 scc 115, u.t. of dadra and haveli v. fatehsinh mohansinh chauhan manu/sc/3471/2006manu/sc/3471/2006 : (2006) 7 scc 529, iddar v. aabida manu/sc/7857/2007manu/sc/7857/2007 : (2007) 11 scc 211, himanshu singh sabharwal v. state of m.p. manu/sc/1193/2008manu/sc/1193/2008 : (2008) 3 scc 602, godrej pacific tech. ltd. v. computer joint india ltd. manu/sc/7886/2008manu/sc/7886/2008 : (2008) 11 scc 108, hanuman ram v. the state of rajasthan manu/sc/8107/2008manu/sc/8107/2008 : (2008) 15 scc 652, sudevanand v. state through cbi manu/sc/0041/2012manu/sc/0041/2012 : (2012) 3 scc 387, mohd. hussain @ julfikar ali v. the state (govt. of nct) delhi manu/sc/0012/2012manu/sc/0012/2012 : air (2012) sc 750, j. jayalalithaa v. state of karnataka manu/sc/0994/2013manu/sc/0994/2013 : (2014) 2 scc 401, salamat ali v. state (crl. a. no. 242/2010, high court of delhi).9. we have considered the rival submissions.10. it can hardly be gainsaid that fair trial is a part of guarantee under article 21 of the constitution of india. its content has primarily to be determined from the statutory provisions for conduct of trial, though in some matters where statutory provisions may be silent, the court may evolve a principle of law to meet a situation which has not been provided for. it is also true that principle of fair trial has to be kept in mind for interpreting the statutory provisions.11. it is further well settled that fairness of trial has to be seen not only from the point of view of the accused, but also from the point of view of the victim and the society. in the name of fair trial, the system cannot be held to ransom. the accused is entitled to be represented by a counsel of his choice, to be provided all relevant documents, to cross-examine the prosecution witnesses and to lead evidence in his defence. the object of provision for recall is to reserve the power with the court to prevent any injustice in the conduct of the trial at any stage. the power available with the court to prevent injustice has to be exercised only if the court, for valid reasons, feels that injustice is caused to a party. such a finding, with reasons, must be specifically recorded by the court before the power is exercised. it is not possible to lay down precise situations when such power can be exercised. the legislature in its wisdom has left the power undefined. thus, the scope of the power has to be considered from case to case. the guidance for the purpose is available in several decisions relied upon by the parties. it will be sufficient to refer to only some of the decisions for the principles laid down which are relevant for this case.12. in rajaram case, the complainant was examined but he did not support the prosecution case. on account of subsequent events he changed his mind and applied for recall under section 311 code of criminal procedure which was declined by the trial court but allowed by the high court. this court held such a course to be impermissible, it was observed:13. ... in order to appreciate the stand of the appellant it will be worthwhile to refer to section 311 code of criminal procedure, as well as section 138 of the evidence act. the same are extracted hereunder:section 311, code of criminal procedure311. power to summon material witness, or examine person present.--any court may, at any stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this code, summon any person as a witness, or examine any person in attendance, though not summoned as a witness, or recall and re-examine any person already examined; and the court shall summon and examine or recall and re-examine any such person if his evidence appears to it to be essential to the just decision of the case.***section 138, evidence act138. order of examinations.--witnesses shall be first examined-in-chief then (if the adverse party so desires) cross-examined, then (if the party calling him so desires) re-examined.the examination and cross-examination must relate to relevant facts but the cross-examination need not be confined to the facts to which the witness testified on his examination-in-chief.direction of re-examination.--the re-examination shall be directed to the explanation of matters referred to in cross-examination; and if new matter is, by permission of the court, introduced in re-examination, the adverse party may further cross-examine upon that matter.14. a conspicuous reading of section 311 code of criminal procedure would show that widest of the powers have been invested with the courts when it comes to the question of summoning a witness or to recall or re-examine any witness already examined. a reading of the provision shows that the expression "any" has been used as a prefix to "court", "inquiry", "trial", "other proceeding", "person as a witness", "person in attendance though not summoned as a witness", and "person already examined". by using the said expression "any" as a prefix to the various expressions mentioned above, it is ultimately stated that all that was required to be satisfied by the court was only in relation to such evidence that appears to the court to be essential for the just decision of the case. section 138 of the evidence act, prescribed the order of examination of a witness in the court. the order of re-examination is also prescribed calling for such a witness so desired for such re-examination. therefore, a reading of section 311 code of criminal procedure and section 138 evidence act, insofar as it comes to the question of a criminal trial, the order of re-examination at the desire of any person under section 138, will have to necessarily be in consonance with the prescription contained in section 311 code of criminal procedure. it is, therefore, imperative that the invocation of section 311 code of criminal procedure and its application in a particular case can be ordered by the court, only by bearing in mind the object and purport of the said provision, namely, for achieving a just decision of the case as noted by us earlier. the power vested under the said provision is made available to any court at any stage in any inquiry or trial or other proceeding initiated under the code for the purpose of summoning any person as a witness or for examining any person in attendance, even though not summoned as witness or to recall or re-examine any person already examined. insofar as recalling and re-examination of any person already examined is concerned, the court must necessarily consider and ensure that such recall and re-examination of any person, appears in the view of the court to be essential for the just decision of the case. therefore, the paramount requirement is just decision and for that purpose the essentiality of a person to be recalled and re-examined has to be ascertained. to put it differently, while such a widest power is invested with the court, it is needless to state that exercise of such power should be made judicially and also with extreme care and caution.13. after referring to earlier decisions on the point, the court culled out following principles to be borne in mind:17.1. whether the court is right in thinking that the new evidence is needed by it? whether the evidence sought to be led in under section 311 is noted by the court for a just decision of a case?17.2. the exercise of the widest discretionary power under section 311 code of criminal procedure should ensure that the judgment should not be rendered on inchoate, inconclusive and speculative presentation of facts, as thereby the ends of justice would be defeated.17.3. if evidence of any witness appears to the court to be essential to the just decision of the case, it is the power of the court to summon and examine or recall and re-examine any such person.17.4. the exercise of power under section 311 code of criminal procedure should be resorted to only with the object of finding out the truth or obtaining proper proof for such facts, which will lead to a just and correct decision of the case.17.5. the exercise of the said power cannot be dubbed as filling in a lacuna in a prosecution case, unless the facts and circumstances of the case make it apparent that the exercise of power by the court would result in causing serious prejudice to the accused, resulting in miscarriage of justice.17.6. the wide discretionary power should be exercised judiciously and not arbitrarily.17.7. the court must satisfy itself that it was in every respect essential to examine such a witness or to recall him for further examination in order to arrive at a just decision of the case.17.8. the object of section 311 code of criminal procedure simultaneously imposes a duty on the court to determine the truth and to render a just decision.17.9. the court arrives at the conclusion that additional evidence is necessary, not because it would be impossible to pronounce the judgment without it, but because there would be a failure of justice without such evidence being considered.17.10. exigency of the situation, fair play and good sense should be the safeguard, while exercising the discretion. the court should bear in mind that no party in a trial can be foreclosed from correcting errors and that if proper evidence was not adduced or a relevant material was not brought on record due to any inadvertence, the court should be magnanimous in permitting such mistakes to be rectified.17.11. the court should be conscious of the position that after all the trial is basically for the prisoners and the court should afford an opportunity to them in the fairest manner possible. in that parity of reasoning, it would be safe to err in favour of the accused getting an opportunity rather than protecting the prosecution against possible prejudice at the cost of the accused. the court should bear in mind that improper or capricious exercise of such a discretionary power, may lead to undesirable results.17.12. the additional evidence must not be received as a disguise or to change the nature of the case against any of the party.17.13. the power must be exercised keeping in mind that the evidence that is likely to be tendered, would be germane to the issue involved and also ensure that an opportunity of rebuttal is given to the other party.17.14. the power under section 311 code of criminal procedure must therefore, be invoked by the court only in order to meet the ends of justice for strong and valid reasons and the same must be exercised with care, caution and circumspection. the court should bear in mind that fair trial entails the interest of the accused, the victim and the society and, therefore, the grant of fair and proper opportunities to the persons concerned, must be ensured being a constitutional goal, as well as a human right.14. in hoffman andreas case, the counsel who was conducting the case was ill and died during the progress of the trial. the new counsel sought recall on the ground that the witnesses could not be cross-examined on account of illness of the counsel. this prayer was allowed in peculiar circumstances with the observation that normally a closed trial could not be reopened but illness and death of the counsel was in the facts and circumstances considered to be a valid ground for recall of witnesses. it was observed:6. normally, at this late stage, we would be disinclined to open up a closed trial once again. but we are persuaded to consider it in this case on account of the unfortunate development that took place during trial i.e. the passing away of the defence counsel midway of the trial. the counsel who was engaged for defending the appellant had cross-examined the witnesses but he could not complete the trial because of his death. when the new counsel took up the matter he would certainly be under the disadvantage that he could not ascertain from the erstwhile counsel as to the scheme of the defence strategy which the predeceased advocate had in mind or as to why he had not put further questions on certain aspects. in such circumstances, if the new counsel thought to have the material witnesses further examined the court could adopt latitude and a liberal view in the interest of justice, particularly when the court has unbridled powers in the matter as enshrined in section 311 of the code. after all the trial is basically for the prisoners and courts should afford the opportunity to them in the fairest manner possible.15. the above observations cannot be read as laying down any inflexible rule to routinely permit a recall on the ground that cross-examination was not proper for reasons attributable to a counsel. while advancement of justice remains the prime object of law, it cannot be understood that recall can be allowed for the asking or reasons related to mere convenience. it has normally to be presumed that the counsel conducting a case is competent particularly when a counsel is appointed by choice of a litigant. taken to its logical end, the principle that a retrial must follow on every change of a counsel, can have serious consequences on conduct of trials and the criminal justice system. witnesses cannot be expected to face the hardship of appearing in court repeatedly, particularly in sensitive cases such as the present one. it can result in undue hardship for victims, especially so, of heinous crimes, if they are required to repeatedly appear in court to face cross-examination.16. the interest of justice may suffer if the counsel conducting the trial is physically or mentally unfit on account of any disability. the interest of the society is paramount and instead of trials being conducted again on account of unfitness of the counsel, reform may appear to be necessary so that such a situation does not arise. perhaps time has come to review the advocates act and the relevant rules to examine the continued fitness of an advocate to conduct a criminal trial on account of advanced age or other mental or physical infirmity, to avoid grievance that an advocate who conducted trial was unfit or incompetent. this is an aspect which needs to be looked into by the concerned authorities including the law commission and the bar council of india.17. in state (nct of delhi) v. navjot sandhu manu/sc/0465/2005manu/sc/0465/2005 : (2005) 11 scc 600, this court held:167. ... we do not think that the court should dislodge the counsel and go on searching for some other counsel to the liking of the accused. the right to legal aid cannot be taken thus far. it is not demonstrated before us as to how the case was mishandled by the advocate appointed as amicus except pointing out stray instances pertaining to the cross-examination of one or two witnesses. the very decision relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant, namely, strickland v. washington makes it clear that judicial scrutiny of a counsel's performance must be careful, deferential and circumspect as the ground of ineffective assistance could be easily raised after an adverse verdict at the trial. it was observed therein:judicial scrutiny of the counsel's performance must be highly deferential. it is all too tempting for a defendant to second-guess the counsel's assistance after conviction or adverse sentence, and it is all too easy for a court, examining the counsel's defence after it has proved unsuccessful, to conclude that a particular act of omission of the counsel was unreasonable. cf. engle v. isaac [ manu/ussc/0163/1982 : 456 us 107 (1982) at pp. 133-134). a fair assessment of attorney performance requires that every effort be made to eliminate the distorting effects of hindsight, to reconstruct the circumstances of the counsel's challenged conduct, and to evaluate the conduct from the counsel's perspective at the time. because of the difficulties inherent in making the evaluation, a court must indulge in a strong presumption that the counsel's conduct falls within the wide range of reasonable professional assistance;....18. it may be proper to recall that the present case is in the category of cases where the trial is required to be fast tracked. in fact this court directed in shivanna [manu/sc/0400/2014manu/sc/0400/2014 : (2014) 8 scc 916] as under:2. while we propose to consider this matter on merits after service of notice to the respondent-accused, we feel acutely concerned as to why the union of india should not take initiative and steps to evolve a procedure for fast-track justice to be adopted by the investigating agencies and the fast track courts by proposing amendments to code of criminal procedure for speedy justice to the victim.3. fast track courts no doubt are being constituted for expeditious disposal of cases involving the charge of rape at the trial stage, but we are perturbed and anguished to notice that although there are fast track courts for disposal of such cases, we do not yet have a fast-track procedure for dealing with cases of rape and gang rape lodged under section 376 indian penal code with the result that such heinous offences are repeated incessantly.4. we are of the considered opinion that there is pressing need to introduce drastic amendments to code of criminal procedure in the nature of fast-track procedure for fast track courts and here is an occasion where we deem it just and appropriate to issue notice and call upon the union of india to file its response as to why it should not take initiative and sincere steps for introducing necessary amendment into code of criminal procedure, 1973 involving trial for the charge of "rape" by directing that all the witnesses who are examined in relation to the offence and incident of rape cases should be straightaway produced before the magistrate for recording their statement to be kept in sealed cover and thereafter the same be treated as evidence at the stage of trial which may be put to test by subjecting it to cross-examination. we are further of the view that the statement of victim should as far as possible be recorded before the judicial magistrate under section 164 code of criminal procedure skipping over the recording of statement by the police under section 161 code of criminal procedure which in any case is inadmissible except for contradiction so that the statement of the accused thereafter be recorded under section 313 code of criminal procedure. the accused then can be committed to the appropriate court for trial whereby the trial court can straightaway allow cross-examination of the witnesses whose evidence were recorded earlier before the magistrate.5. what we wish to emphasise is that the recording of evidence of the victim and other witnesses multiple times ought to be put to an end which is the primary reason for delay of the trial. we are of the view that if the evidence is recorded for the first time itself before the judicial magistrate under section 164 code of criminal procedure and the same be kept in sealed cover to be treated as deposition of the witnesses and hence admissible at the stage of trial with liberty to the defence to cross-examine them with further liberty to the accused to lead his defence witnesses and other evidence with a right to cross-examination by the prosecution, it can surely cut short and curtail the protracted trial if it is introduced at least for trial of rape cases which is bound to reduce the duration of trial and thus offer a speedy remedy by way of a fast-track procedure to the fast track court to resort to.6. considering the consistent recurrence of the heinous crime of rape and gang rape all over the country including the metropolitan cities, we are of the view that it is high time such measures of reform in code of criminal procedure be introduced after due deliberation and debate by the legal fraternity as also all concerned. we, therefore, deem it just and appropriate to issue notice to the union of india through the attorney general which the counsel for the petitioner is directed to serve by way of dasti summons. the matter be posted again on 3-9-2013 for further consideration.19. in continuation of the above, further order dated 25th april, 2014 [manu/sc/0400/2014manu/sc/0400/2014 : (2014) 8 scc 913] was passed as follows:10.1. upon receipt of information relating to the commission of offence of rape, the investigating officer shall make immediate steps to take the victim to any metropolitan/preferably judicial magistrate for the purpose of recording her statement under section 164 code of criminal procedure. a copy of the statement under section 164 code of criminal procedure should be handed over to the investigating officer immediately with a specific direction that the contents of such statement under section 164 code of criminal procedure should not be disclosed to any person till charge-sheet/report under section 173 code of criminal procedure is filed.10.2. the investigating officer shall as far as possible take the victim to the nearest lady metropolitan/preferably lady judicial magistrate.10.3. the investigating officer shall record specifically the date and the time at which he learnt about the commission of the offence of rape and the date and time at which he took the victim to the metropolitan/preferably lady judicial magistrate as aforesaid.10.4. if there is any delay exceeding 24 hours in taking the victim to the magistrate, the investigating officer should record the reasons for the same in the case diary and hand over a copy of the same to the magistrate.10.5. medical examination of the victim: section 164-a code of criminal procedure inserted by act 25 of 2005 in code of criminal procedure imposes an obligation on the part of investigating officer to get the victim of the rape immediately medically examined. a copy of the report of such medical examination should be immediately handed over to the magistrate who records the statement of the victim under section 164 code of criminal procedure.11. a copy of this order thus be circulated to all the directors general of police of all the states/commissioners of police in metropolitan cities/commissioners of police of union territories who are then directed to send a copy of this order to all the police stations-in-charge in their states/union territories for its compliance in cases which are registered on or after the receipt of a copy of these directions. necessary instructions by the dgps/commissioners of police be also issued to all the police stations-in-charge by the dgps/commissioners of police incorporating the directions issued by us and recorded hereinbefore.20. in mir. mohd. omar v. state of w.b. manu/sc/0317/1989manu/sc/0317/1989 : (1989) 4 scc 436 after the statement of the accused under section 313 was recorded, the public prosecutor filed an application for his re-examination on the ground that some more questions are required to be asked. the application was rejected by the trial court but allowed by the high court. this court disapproved the course adopted and held:16. ... here again it may be noted that the prosecution has closed the evidence. the accused have been examined under section 313 of the code. the prosecution did not at any stage move the trial judge for recalling pw 34 for further examination. in these circumstances, the liberty reserved to the prosecution to recall pw 34 for re-examination is undoubtedly uncalled for.21. we may also note that the approach to deal with a case of this nature has to different from other cases. we may refer to the judgment of this court in gurmit singh case, wherein it was observed:8. ... the courts must, while evaluating evidence, remain alive to the fact that in a case of rape, no self-respecting woman would come forward in a court just to make a humiliating statement against her honour such as is involved in the commission of rape on her. in cases involving sexual molestation, supposed considerations which have no material effect on the veracity of the prosecution case or even discrepancies in the statement of the prosecutrix should not, unless the discrepancies are such which are of fatal nature, be allowed to throw out an otherwise reliable prosecution case. the inherent bashfulness of the females and the tendency to conceal outrage of sexual aggression are factors which the courts should not overlook. the testimony of the victim in such cases is vital and unless there are compelling reasons which necessitate looking for corroboration of her statement, the courts should find no difficulty to act on the testimony of a victim of sexual assault alone to convict an accused where her testimony inspires confidence and is found to be reliable....xxx21. of late, crime against women in general and rape in particular is on the increase. it is an irony that while we are celebrating woman's rights in all spheres, we show little or no concern for her honour. it is a sad refection on the attitude of indifference of the society towards the violation of human dignity of the victims of sex crimes. we must remember that a rapist not only violates the victim's privacy and personal integrity, but inevitably causes serious psychological as well as physical harm in the process. rape is not merely a physical assault -- it is often destructive of the whole personality of the victim. a murderer destroys the physical body of his victim, a rapist degrades the very soul of the helpless female. the courts, therefore, shoulder a great responsibility while trying an accused on charges of rape. they must deal with such cases with utmost sensitivity....22. we may now refer to the orders passed by the trial court dated 18th february, 2015 and the high court dated 4th march, 2015. referring to the ground of the earlier counsel not being competent, the trial court observed that the counsel was of the choice of the accused. the accused was not facing a criminal trial for the first time. the cross-examination of witnesses was deferred time and again to enable the counsel to seek instructions from the accused. the cross-examination of the prosecutrix was deferred on 15th january, 2015 to enable the counsel to have legal interview with the accused. after part of cross-examination on 16th january, 2015, further cross-examination was concluded on 17th january, 2015. cross-examination of pw 13 was deferred on the request of the accused. similarly, cross-examination of pws 22, 26 and 27 was deferred on the request of the defence counsel. after referring to the record, the trial court observed as under:22. the aforesaid proceedings clearly bely the claim of the accused/applicant that the case has been proceeding at a "hurried pace" or that he was not duly represented by a defence counsel of his choice. the claim of the applicant that he was unwilling to continue with his earlier counsel is also nothing but a bundle of lie in as much as the accused never submitted before the court that he wants to change his counsel. rather, it is revealed from the record that the earlier counsel, sh. alok kumar was acting as per his instructions and having legal interview with him. the accused cannot be permitted to take advantage of his submissions made on the first date i.e. 13/01/2015 that he wants to engage a new counsel as his subsequent conduct does not support this submission. i may also add that before proceeding with the case further, i had personally asked the accused in the open court whether he wants to continue with his counsels and only on getting a reply in the affirmative, were the proceedings continued further. it thus appears that the endeavor of the accused by fling this application is only to delay the proceedings despite the fact that all along the trial his request for adjournment have been duly considered and allowed and he has been duly represented by a private counsel of his choice.23. i am also unable to accept the plea of the accused that the counsel representing him earlier was incompetent, being a novice and that he is entitled to recall all the prosecution witnesses now that he has engaged a new counsel. although, sh. alok kumr dubey and sh. ankit bhatia, both have enrolment number of 2014 as per the power of attorney executed by the accused in their favour, however, to my mind the competence of a lawyer is subjective and the date of his enrolment with the bar council can certainly not be said to be a yardstick to measure his competence.24. moreover, the competence of the new counsel may again be questioned by another counsel, who the accused may choose to engage in future. this fact was also admitted by sh. d.k. mishra during the course of arguments on the application under consideration.xxx27. at this stage, to judge as to whether certain questions should have been put to the witnesses in cross examination or should not have been put to them, would in my view result in pre-judging as to what are the material portions of the evidence and would also amount to re-appraising the entire cross examination conducted by the earlier counsel to conclude whether he had done a competent job or not. this certainly is not within the scope and power of the court under section 311 code of criminal procedure. i am supported in my view by the observations of hon'ble delhi high court in its order dated 20/02/2008 in case titled as raminder singh v. state criminal mc 8479/2006, where it has been held as under:in the first place, it requires to be noticed that scope of section 311 code of criminal procedure does not permit a court to go into the aspect whether material portions of the evidence on record should have been put to the witness in cross-examination to elicit their contradictions. if the court is required to perform such an exercise every time an application is filed under section 311 then not only would it be pre-judging what according to it are 'material portions' of the evidence but it would end up reappraising the entire cross-examination conducted by a counsel to find out if the counsel had done a competent job or not. this certainly is not within the scope of the power of the trial court under section 311 code of criminal procedure. no judgment has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner in support of such a contention. even on a practical level it would well nigh be impossible to ensure expeditious completion of trials if trial courts were expected to perform such an exercise at the conclusion of the examination of prosecution witnesses every time.28. it may also be relevant to mention that article 22(1) of the constitution of india confers a fundamental right upon an accused, who has been arrested by the police to be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice. this fundamental right has been duly acknowledged by the hon'ble superior courts in numerous pronouncements including the case of state of madhya pradesh v. shobha ram and ors. manu/sc/0271/1966manu/sc/0271/1966 : air 1966 sc 1910 wherein it has been observed as under:under article 22, a person who is arrested for whatever reason, gets three independent rights. the first is the right to be told the reasons for the arrest as soon as an arrest's made, the second is the right to be produced before a magistrate within 24 hours and the third is right to be defended by advocate of his choice. when the constitution lays down in absolute terms a right to be defended by one' own counsel, it cannot be taken away by ordinary law, and, it is not sufficient to say that the accused was so deprived, of the right, did not stand in danger of losing his personal liberty.29. in the case of state v. mohd. afzal and ors. manu/de/1026/2003manu/de/1026/2003 : 2003 iv ad (cr.) 205, the hon'ble delhi high court addressed the issue of fundamental right of the accused to be represented by a counsel from the point of his arrest especially in a case involving capital punishment. the case of us supreme court in strickland v. washington 466 u.s. 688 (1984) was cited before the delhi high court and the ld. counsel for the accused in that case had argued that the law required a conviction to be set aside where counsel's assistance was not provided or was ineffective. hon'ble delhi high court took note of the observations in the said case as well as the rulings of the hon'ble supreme court in the case of manu/sc/0374/1990manu/sc/0374/1990 : (1991) 1 scc 286 kishore chand v. state of himachal pradesh, (1931) 1 scc 627 khatri and ors. v. state of bihar and ors., manu/sc/0122/1979manu/sc/0122/1979 : (1980) 1 scc 108 hussainara khatoon and ors. v. home secretary, state of bihar, manu/sc/0138/1983manu/sc/0138/1983 : (1983) 3 scc 307 rajan dwivedi v. union of india, manu/sc/0119/1978manu/sc/0119/1978 : (1978) 3 scc 544 madhav hayawadanrao hoskot v. state of maharashtra while dealing with this issue. it was however observed that from hindsight it is easy to pick wholes in the cross examination conducted but applying the test in strickland's case, it cannot be said that it was the constructive denial of the counsels to accused mohd. afzal. the observations of the hon'ble delhi high court were met with the approval by hon'ble supreme court when the matter was decided by the hon'ble apex court by its ruling titled as state v. navjot sandhu and ors. manu/sc/0465/2005manu/sc/0465/2005 : air 2005 sc 3820.30. the hon'ble apex court, after considering the facts of the case, nutshell that "we do not think that the court should dislodge the counsel and go on searching for some other counsel to the liking of the accused. the right to legal aid cannot be taken thus far." while relying upon the ruling in the case strickland's (supra), the hon'ble supreme court observed that scrutiny of performance of a counsel who has conducted trial should be highly deferential.xxx34. it may be noted that the recall of io and prosecutrix has been sought on the ground besides others, that she has to be questioned as to why she did not give her sim of her mobile to the io and why the io did not ask her for the same. similarly, it has been submitted that the accused though admitted his potency report but has not admitted the time and process of the potency test as stated by the io and thus the 10 needs to be recalled. further, si sandeep is required to be recalled for cross examination in order to cross examine him with regard to the document given by the transporter, who brought the cab in question from mathura to delhi. it may also be mentioned that in his zest to seek recall of all the prosecution witnesses, the applicant has also sought recall of one lady constable manju, who as per record was not even examined as a prosecution witness.35. it is further necessary to mention that on 04/02/2015 accused had moved an application under section 311 code of criminal procedure, thereby seeking recall of prosecutrix pw-2 and pw-23 ayush dabas. the application was dismissed. the present application has been filed now seeking recall of all pws, including pw-2 and pw-23, while the order dated 04/02/2015 still remains unchallenged.36. the application under consideration is thus nothing but an attempt to protract the trial and in fact seek an entire retrial. there is no change in circumstances except change of counsel, which, to my mind, is no ground to allow the application. interestingly, in para 17 of the application, it has been contended that the present counsel is not aware of the scheme and design of defence of the previous counsel and is thus at a loss and disadvantageous position to defend the accused and for conducting the case as per his acumen and legal expertise, the recalling of pws are necessary. it may be noted that the defence of an under trial is not expected to vary from counsel to counsel and irrespective of change of counsel, an under trial is expected to have a single and true line of defence which cannot change every time he changes a counsel. nor can a new counsel defend the case of such an under trial as per the new scheme and design in accordance with his acumen and legal expertise.23. the high court made a reference to the criminal law amendment act, 2013 providing for trial relating to offences under section 376 and other specified offences being completed within two months from the date of fling of the charge sheet. reference has also been made to circular issued by the delhi high court drawing the attention of the judicial officers to the mandate of speedy disposal of session cases. the high court also referred to the decisions of this court in lt. col. s.j. chaudhary v. state (delhi administration) manu/sc/0094/1984manu/sc/0094/1984 : (1984) 1 scc 722, state of u.p. v. shambhu nath singh manu/sc/0221/2001manu/sc/0221/2001 : (2001) 4 scc 667, akil @ javed v. state of nct of delhi manu/sc/1070/2012manu/sc/1070/2012 : (2013) 7 scc 125 and vinod kumar v. state of punjab manu/sc/0068/2015manu/sc/0068/2015 : (2015) 1 scale 542, requiring the trials to be conducted on day to day basis keeping in view the mandate of section 309 code of criminal procedure.24. after rejecting the plea of the accused that there was any infirmity in the conduct of the trial after detailed reference to the proceedings, the high court concluded:31. the aforesaid narration of proceedings before the learned additional sessions judge clearly reflects that while posting the matter on day to day basis, the court's only endeavour was to comply with the provisions of section 309 code of criminal procedure as far as possible while ensuring the right of the accused to a fair trial. the earlier counsel had been seeking adjournment for consulting the petitioner which was duly granted and under these circumstances the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that justice hurried is justice buried, deserves outright rejection.25. it was then observed that competence of a counsel was a subjective matter and plea of incompetence of the counsel could not be easily accepted. it was observed:32. the other submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that sh. alok dubey, advocate was not competent to appear as an advocate inasmuch as he had not even undergone screening test as required by bar council of delhi rules and was not issued practice certificate, this submission is not fortified by any record. much was said against the competency of the earlier counsel representing the petitioner. however, learned standing counsel for the state was right in submitting that competency of an advocate is a subjective issue which should not have been attacked behind the back of the concerned advocate....33. learned additional standing counsel for the state has furnished details of the number of questions put by the earlier counsel to the prosecution witnesses for showing the performance of the earlier counsel. moreover, one cannot lose sight of the fact that the advocate was appointed by the petitioner of his own choice.26. inspite of the high court not having found any fault in the conduct of the proceedings, it held that "although recalling of all the prosecution witnesses is not necessary" recall of certain witnesses was necessary for the reasons given in para 15(a) to (xx) on the application of the accused. it was observed that the accused was in custody and if he adopted delaying tactics it is only he who would suffer.27. it is difficult to approve the view taken by the high court. undoubtedly, fair trial is the objective and it is the duty of the court to ensure such fairness. width of power under section 311 code of criminal procedure is beyond any doubt. not a single specific reason has been assigned by the high court as to how in the present case recall of as many as 13 witnesses was necessary as directed in the impugned order. no fault has been found with the reasoning of the order of the trial court. the high court rejected on merits the only two reasons pressed before it that the trial was hurried and the counsel was not competent. in the face of rejecting these grounds, without considering the hardship to the witnesses, undue delay in the trial, and without any other cogent reason, allowing recall merely on the observation that it is only the accused who will suffer by the delay as he was in custody could, in the circumstances, be hardly accepted as valid or serving the ends of justice. it is not only matter of delay but also of harassment for the witnesses to be recalled which could not be justified on the ground that the accused was in custody and that he would only suffer by prolonging of the proceedings. certainly recall could be permitted if essential for the just decision but not on such consideration as has been adopted in the present case. mere observation that recall was necessary "for ensuring fair trial" is not enough unless there are tangible reasons to show how the fair trial suffered without recall. recall is not a matter of course and the discretion given to the court has to be exercised judiciously to prevent failure of justice and not arbitrarily. while the party is even permitted to correct its bona fide error and may be entitled to further opportunity even when such opportunity may be sought without any fault on the part of the opposite party, plea for recall for advancing justice has to be bona fide and has to be balanced carefully with the other relevant considerations including uncalled for hardship to the witnesses and uncalled for delay in the trial. having regard to these considerations, we do not find any ground to justify the recall of witnesses already examined.28. it will also be pertinent to mention that power of judicial superintendence under article 227 of the constitution and under section 482 code of criminal procedure has to be exercised sparingly when there is patent error or gross injustice in the view taken by a subordinate court1. a finding to this effect has to be supported by reasons. in the present case, the high court has allowed the prayer of the accused, even while finding no error in the view taken by the trial court, merely by saying that exercise of power was required for granting fair and proper opportunity to the accused. no reasons have been recorded in support of this observation. on the contrary, the view taken by the trial court rejecting the stand of the accused has been affirmed. thus, the conclusion appears to be inconsistent with the reasons in the impugned order.29. we may now sum up our reasons for disapproving the view of the high court in the present case:(i) the trial court and the high court held that the accused had appointed counsel of his choice. he was facing trial in other cases also. the earlier counsel were given due opportunity and had duly conducted cross-examination. they were under no handicap;(ii) no finding could be recorded that the counsel appointed by the accused were incompetent particularly at back of such counsel;(iii) expeditious trial in a heinous offence as is alleged in the present case is in the interests of justice;(iv) the trial court as well as the high court rejected the reasons for recall of the witnesses;(v) the court has to keep in mind not only the need for giving fair opportunity to the accused but also the need for ensuring that the victim of the crime is not unduly harassed;(vi) mere fact that the accused was in custody and that he will suffer by the delay could be no consideration for allowing recall of witnesses, particularly at the fag end of the trial;(vii) mere change of counsel cannot be ground to recall the witnesses;(viii) there is no basis for holding that any prejudice will be caused to the accused unless the witnesses are recalled;(ix) the high court has not rejected the reasons given by the trial court nor given any justification for permitting recall of the witnesses except for making general observations that recall was necessary for ensuring fair trial. this observation is contrary to the reasoning of the high court in dealing with the grounds for recall, i.e., denial of fair opportunity on account of incompetence of earlier counsel or on account of expeditious proceedings;(x) there is neither any patent error in the approach adopted by the trial court rejecting the prayer for recall nor any clear injustice if such prayer is not granted.30. accordingly, we allow these appeals, set aside the impugned order passed by the high court and dismiss the application for recall.1jasbir singh v. state of punjab manu/sc/4529/2006manu/sc/4529/2006 : (2006) 8 scc 294, prs. 10 to 14.
anil r. dave, j.1. leave granted.2. the only issue is with regard to payment of the amount which had been paid by the appellant to the respondents at the time of entering into an agreement to purchase the property in question.3. in view of the fact that the suit filed by the appellant for specific performance had been dismissed on the ground that the respondents did not have title, the respondents must repay the amount received by them from the appellant. the amount shall be returned within two months from today with simple interest @9%.4. intimation of this order be served upon the respondents.5. the appeal is allowed. pending application, if any, stands disposed of. there shall be no order as to costs.
1. this appeal by special leave at the instance eight appellants challenges the judgment and order dated 18th july, 2008 passed by the high court of rajasthan at jodhpur in division bench criminal appeal no. 679 of 2000. initially, 27 persons were charge sheeted for having committed offences punishable under section 302, in the alternative under section 302/149; 307, in the alternative under section 307/149; 325, 323, in the alternative under sections 323/149, 148 and 447 of the indian penal code [for short 'ipc'].2. one of the accused persons named, deva ram died pending trial. out of 26 persons so tried by the trial court, 16 were acquitted by the trial court while other 10 were convicted and sentenced under section 148 indian penal code to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years, under section 302 read with 149 indian penal code to undergo life imprisonment with a fine of ` 1,000/- each in default whereof to suffer further simple imprisonment for three months; under section 325 indian penal code read with section 149 indian penal code to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years with a fine of ` 500/-, in default whereof to undergo simple imprisonment for two months; under section 324 indian penal code read with section 149 indian penal code to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years and under section 323 indian penal code read with section 149 indian penal code to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months. the ten convicted accused preferred division bench criminal appeal no. 679 of 2000 before the high court. during the pendency of the appeal, two appellants namely, amra ram and niryana ram died and their appeal was dismissed as abated by orders dated 12th may, 2003 and 9th october, 2006, respectively. the appeal of the remaining eight accused was dismissed by the high court by the judgment under appeal confirming the conviction and sentence as recorded by the trial court.3. this appeal by way of special leave has been preferred by those eight accused. it appears that four appellants named mohan ram, kunana ram, gopal ram and indra ram have already completed their sentence. two appellants, tulcha ram and likhma ram, are stated to have expired and their appeal is declared to have abated. one appellant bhagwana ram was kept in open jail. thus, we are concerned in this appeal namely, smt. bhanwari, wife of megha ram and the appeal insofar as other seven appellants are concerned is not being pressed and the appeal qua those seven appellants stands dismissed as such.4. according to the prosecution, the incident which occurred on 30th june, 1989 has genesis in rival claims set up in respect of agricultural land khasra no. 229 and 357 of village dassusar of haika simsiya in district churu, rajasthan. this land originally belonged to one moola ram who died issueless leaving behind his widow sua devi. one jetha ram claimed to have been adopted by said moola ram. the fact of adoption was being denied by the said sua devi. sua devi sold this land in dispute to one nirayana ram and giridhari lal by registered sale deed and according to her she had delivered possession to the purchasers. the aforesaid sale by sua devi was challenged by jetha ram by filing a civil suit in the court of the sub-divisional magistrate, ratangarh in which an interim order was passed on 4th november, 1988, restraining the purchasers from interfering with the possession of the land in question. it further appears that niryana ram had filed a counter suit. in this scenario, when both the parties had filed civil litigation claiming the right to and possession of the land in question, the incident on 30th june, 1989 occurred.5. according to the prosecution in the morning of 30th june, 1989, the accused party came on a camel cart and finding that the complainant party was ploughing the agricultural land, members of the accused party exhorted that they be taught a lesson. in the fight that ensued thereafter five persons from the complainant side namely, shera ram, sugana ram, narayana, tiku and gordhan sustained various injuries and succumbed to their injuries. additionally, five witnesses namely, p.w. 4-bhagwana ram, p.w. 5-thakur ram, p.w. 10-harkha ram, p.w. 11-girdhari ram and p.w. 14-bhagwana ram (2) also suffered injuries. according to the prosecution, all 27 accused persons were variously armed and had come to the agricultural land in question by forming an unlawful assembly.6. the reporting of the incident was made by p.w. 3 mana ram at 11:00 a.m. at government hospital, ratangarh pursuant to which the crime in question namely, fir no. 10 of 1989 was registered. a cross case was also registered at the instance of the accused party who contended that it was in fact the complainant party who had come to the field in question to dispossess them. it may be noted that some of the accused persons had also suffered injuries in that transaction which injury reports are available at exhibits d10 to d20 and insofar as the first appellant herein is concerned, the injury report exhibit d-19 shows that she had suffered a punctured wound though described as simple.7. the post-mortem report in respect of shera ram, exhibit p77 shows that he suffered 20 injuries, out of which 1-13 and 7-20 were caused by a blunt weapon while injuries 14-16 were caused by a sharp-edged weapon and that he died due to the said injuries. the post-mortem report exhibit p78 shows that sugana ram had suffered 28 injuries caused by blunt weapon, sharp-edged weapon piercing object and that he suffered fractures and damage to liver. the post-mortem report, exhibit p79 in respect of gordhan reveals that he sustained two punctured wounds on vital parts, four lacerated wounds and one abrasion and that he died due to injury to his vital organ namely, left lung. post-mortem report, exhibit p80 shows that tiku ram suffered 19 injuries including incised wounds, fractures, piercing wounds, crushed wounds and abrasions including injuries to his lungs. lastly, the post-mortem, exhibit p81 shows that deceased narayan ram suffered 21 injuries inflicted by blunt weapons, sharp-edged weapons and piercing object resulting in his death. these post-mortem report; were proved by p.w. 23, dr. bhanwar lal verma.8. the eye witness account given by p.ws. 4, 5, 10 and 11 specifically shows the presence of the first appellant. the eye witness account further shows that she was armed with a weapon namely, lathi. it is true that none of the witnesses have specifically alleged any role to the first appellant in causing any injury to any of the deceased.9. the trial court after considering the material on record by its judgment dated 15th november, 2000, convicted and sentenced 10 accused as mentioned hereinabove. according to the trial court, p.ws. 3, 4, and 5 being interested witnesses could not be relied upon. the trial court, however, found the case against 10 accused persons being proved by the prosecution. the fact that the accused had suffered injuries in the transaction, according to the trial court, fully established their presence. the trial court found that the agricultural land in question was actually in possession of the accused party and thus acquitted the accused of the charges under section447 indian penal code. however, the trial court recorded that the accused had completely exceeded their right of private defence and as such were guilty of the offences as alleged. the high court has confirmed the conviction and sentence as recorded by the trial court.10. mr. v.j. francis, learned advocate appearing for the appellant bhanwari submitted that the trial court having not relied upon the version of p.ws. 3, 4 and 5, there being no specific allegation against the first appellant, the possession of the disputed land having been found with the accused and they having been acquitted under section 447 indian penal code, the conviction and sentence as recorded against the first appellant was completely erroneous. it was further submitted that the incident in question was a case of free fight and there was no room to conclude that the first appellant was an active participant in the transaction so as to warrant her conviction with the aid of section 149 indian penal code. the learned advocate appearing for the state, however, submitted that the presence and participation of the first appellant was proved beyond any doubt and the fact that all 27 persons had come prepared to open an assault actually shows the satisfaction of the ingredients under section 149 indian penal code. we have considered the matter and the rival submissions. the fact that the first appellant was present at the time of occurrence has not been seriously disputed or questioned. her presence is spoken to by pws. 4, 5, 10 and 11 who say that she was present and was also armed with a lathi. exhibit d19, the injury report further establishes the presence of the first appellant. it is true that as affirmed by the trial court, the land in question, was actually in possession of the accused and as such it was pleased to acquit the accused of the charges under section 447 indian penal code. however, that would not in any manner justify the assault and the intensity in which five persons lost their lives. the finding that the accused exceeded the right of private defence and as such would be guilty of the offence with which they were charged is absolutely correct. the presence, participation and the preparedness on part of the accused stands fully established. being member of the unlawful assembly which openly assaulted, the first appellant is definitely guilty of the offence with which she was charged and convicted. we have seen the evidence of p.ws. 4 and 5 and the criticism adopted by the trial court, in our view, is not correct. they may be interested but that by itself does not diminish the value of their testimony. their testimony as well as that of other eyewitnesses is quite cogent and consistent and corroborated by the materials on record. we find no reason to differ from the view which has weighed with the trial court and the high court. we, therefore, dismiss the present appeal.
jasti chelameswar, j.1. this court by its judgment in union of india and ors. v. rafique shaikh bhikan and ors. manu/sc/0382/2013manu/sc/0382/2013 : (2013) 4 scc 699 (hereinafter rafique shaikh bhikan, 2013), approved a policy (with some modification) framed by government of india for the registration of private tour operators ("ptos") for haj 2013 (hereafter referred to as "approved policy"). this court opined that such a policy "avoids creation of any monopoly and makes provision for entry of fresh players".2. the modified and approved policy is appended to the judgment as appendix-'i'1. it can be seen from the said judgment that though the policy as framed by the government of india was meant only for one year i.e. for haj 2013, this court directed that it would be the "policy for private tour operators for haj 2013-17"-valid for five years.3. under the approved policy, the ptos were categorised into two groups. category-i consists of ptos who were registered with the ministry of external affairs and facilitated hajis at least for 7 or more years by conducting haj tour operations. the second category consists of two classes of ptos. class-i consists of ptos who had facilitated hajis for less than 7 years and class-ii consists of the ptos who had facilitated at least 50 umrah pilgrims in a year for any five years.4. obviously, the requisite experience for a pto to be categorized in one of the abovementioned two categories must be anterior to haj 2013. it is to be noticed that though the approved policy stipulated "experience of conducting a haj operation" for 7 years for category-i and 5 years experience of conducting "umrah operation" in second class of category-ii, the scheme did not stipulate that those years should be consecutive years, or that they should be the immediate past 7 years or 5 years, as the case may be. the consequences of classification are also specified in para 4 of the scheme;4. 70% of the overall quota of seats will be allocated to eligible ptos under category 3(i) and 30% to eligible ptos under category 3(ii). distribution of seats among qualified ptos will be done as follows:(a) 70% of the haj 2013 pto seats (31,500) will be allocated to eligible ptos under category 3(i) at the rate of 150 seats per pto. in case the number of ptos exceeds 210, the allocation of seats will be done on draw of lots. if the number of qualified ptos is less than 210, each pto will be allocated 150 seats and surplus seats, if any, will be distributed equally among them.(b) 30% of haj 2013 pto seats (9000) will be allocated to eligible ptos under category 3(ii) at the rate of 150 seats per qualified pto. if the number of qualified ptos exceeds 90, the allocation of seats will be done by draw of lots. in case the number of ptos is less than 90, each pto will be allocated 150 seats. balance seats, if any, will be transferred to category i and distributed equally among them. a qualified pto which fails to get selected under the draw of lots in any year will be allocated 150 seats in the ensuing year without qurrah if it remains a qualified pto.5. there is no separate scheme or statute regulating the ptos conducting umrah operations. however, we are informed by the learned additional solicitor general that the government of saudi arabia would not permit any pilgrim for umrah through a pto unless such pto has a contract with one of the agencies authorized by the government of saudi arabia for the purpose. we are informed that as of today there are some 48 such agencies in saudi arabia. we are informed at the bar by the learned additional solicitor general that existence of such a restriction emanates from the law of saudi arabia and the government of india's knowledge of such restriction is based on the information provided by the diplomatic mission of the government of india at saudi arabia.6. there are three annexures to the above scheme. annexure-a specifies the conditions required to be satisfied by a pto and prescribes the documents which are required to be produced to establish the facts necessary to prove that the pto satisfies the conditions for registration of private tour operators (pto) for haj 20132.7. for the purpose of the present controversy, we are concerned with only stipulations (iv) and (vii) which read as follows:(iv) minimum annual turnover of inr one crore during the financial year 2010-2011 or 2011-2012 along with balance sheet and profit and loss account-duly audited by the statutory auditors, tax audit report and income tax return (itr) for financial years 2010-2011 and 2011-2012.(vii) proof of payment made through banking or other authorised channels towards purchase of tickets and hiring of accommodation in makkah/madinah. payments towards purchase of tickets, hiring of accommodation for pilgrims in makkah/madinah, by any other means, would not be accepted.8. this batch of writ petitions are filed by the ptos falling either under category-i or one of the two classes of category-ii. we take three writ petitions as representative cases of the entire batch i.e. writ petition (c) no. 425 of 2016, writ petition (c) no. 441 of 2016 and writ petition (c) no. 501 of 2016.9. the petitioner in writ petition (c) no. 425 of 2016 claims to be a pto who is duly registered with the ministry of external affairs and was allotted a quota of hajis for the years 2009 to 2011 and also in the year 2015 (in all, four years).10. the petitioner in writ petition(c) no. 441 of 2016 claims to be "a registered pto since 2003 to 2012 and also for the year 2015", but it is not very clear from the writ petition whether petitioner was allotted any quota in any one of those years, except a vague statement at para 4.243 of the writ petition.11. coming to writ petition (c) no. 501 of 2016, the petitioner apparently belongs to the class ii of the category-ii i.e. somebody who claims experience of having conducted umrah programme for five years and seeks registration for conducting haj programme for the year 2016.12. the prayers in these three writ petitions, insofar as they are relevant, read as follows:prayer in writ petition (c) no. 425 of 2016(a) issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus commanding and directing the respondents restore paragraph 1 of press release dated 06.05.2016 by withdrawing second para of para 2 of press release dated 21.05.2016;(b) issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus commanding and directing the respondents to exempt the petitioner to furnish documents required under clause (vii), (x), (xi) & (xii) of annexure a of the pto policy for haj-2013 and haj-2014.prayer in writ petition (civil) no. 441 of 2016(a) issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus commanding and directing the respondent to grant registration to the petitioner as pto for conducting haj tour, 2016;"and insofar as, the third writ petition i.e. writ petition (c) no. 501 of 2016 is concerned, the relevant prayers are prayers (a), (b) and (c). prayers (a) and (b) are similar prayers to the prayer in the writ petition (c) no. 425 of 2016, and prayer (c) is as follows:(c) issue a writ, direction or order in the nature of mandamus commanding and directing the respondent not to seek copy of contract which the respondent has sought vide paragraph 4 of press release dated 06.05.2016, as per annexure p-213. the background in which the present litigation arises is as follows:the ministry of external affairs (mea) issued a clarification dated 8th may 2013 by which a pto seeking registration for consideration of allotment of quota for haj programme is required to furnish documents;as regards clause (vii) of annexure a to pto haj policy, 2013, it is clarified that the ptos will have to submit the documents required under clause (vii) of annexure a to pto haj policy, 2013 for a period of at least three years.14. some of the ptos challenged the said document on the ground that such a clarification was unwarranted and does not find any support from the text of stipulation no. (vii). their case is that in view of the fact that stipulation no. (iv) of annexure 'a' prescribes a condition that a pto seeking registration should have a minimum annual turnover of rs. 1 crore "during the financial year 2010-2011 or 2011-12" and calls upon the ptos to submit balance sheet and profit and loss account duly audited and other documents specified therein for the abovementioned two financial years, stipulation no. (vii) also must be understood in the light of stipulation no. (iv), and resultantly, the pto is obligated to furnish the documents referred to therein only for 2 years. this court accepted the submission of the petitioner in jeddah travels & jeddah hajj group v. union of india4 and directed that the case of the petitioner be considered in accordance with the decision of this court.15. thereafter, a number of press releases came to be issued, significant of them are on 29.04.20165, 21.05.20156, 06.05.2016 and 21.05.2016.16. mea issued another press release dated 21.05.2015. from the said press note, it appears that number of ptos who approached this court challenging the mea's clarification dated 08.03.2013 was 22. further, in purported compliance with the direction of this court given in jeddah travels (supra), government examined and found 73 more ptos (20 under category-i and 53 under category-ii) to have been qualified for registration for haj 2015, apart from various other ptos who had otherwise been found qualified. it appears from the said press note that a total number of 615 ptos (253 under category-i and 362 under category-ii) were found to have been qualified for registration for haj 2015. it is stated in the said press note as follows:9. this policy will remain valid from 2015 to 2017 for registration purpose for the new private tour operators who wish to be registered with the ministry on the basis of umrah pilgrims taken by them as per details mentioned in para 6 above. the policy will not be changed unless there are substantive developments which affect it. the policy envisages cross category upward movement of ptos from category-ii to category-i. a qualified pto shall remain qualified for registration purpose till haj-2017 unless it is otherwise disqualified either by government of india or by government of saudi arabia for valid reasons. the allocation of seats to the ptos qualified for registration in each category, will be done every year on the basis of the overall quota of seats for ptos specified in the annual india-saudi arabia bilateral haj agreement and the number of qualified ptos in each category.17. this court passed an order dated 18.05.2016 in a batch of writ petitions similar to the ones on hand, the operative portion of which reads as follows:8) in the light of aforesaid discussion and keeping in view the statement made by the additional solicitor general on behalf of the respondent-union of india, we dispose of these writ petitions finally by granting liberty to each writ petitioner to make a fresh application with all the necessary details with the documents as prescribed for grant of permission to take the pilgrims for hajj for the year 2016 on or before 27.05.2016 to the prescribed authority.9) on such application (s) being made, the concerned authority would examine, consider and decide each such application on its merit strictly in accordance with law and keeping in view the law laid down in the decisions of this court in union of india and ors. v. rafique shaikh bhikan and ors. manu/sc/0382/2013manu/sc/0382/2013 : 2013 (4) scc 699, order dated 07.08.2014 passed in special leave petition (c) no. 20743/2014 entitled union of india and ors. v. all india haj umrah tour organizers association and ors., order dated 07.08.2014 passed in writ petition (civil) no. 480/2014 etc. etc. entitled jeddah travels & jeddah hajj group v. union of india, order dated 12.05.2015 passed in i.a. no. 33 of 2015 in special leave petition (c) no. 28609/2011 entitled union of india v. rafique sheikh bhikan and ors. and order dated 23.07.2015 in w.p. (civil) no. 344/2015 entitled alban hajj umrah service v. union of india.10) let the applications be decided by the concerned authority by passing a reasoned order on each application on or before 29.06.2016 and the order so passed be communicated to each applicant (writ petitioner) immediately.18. we are of the opinion that it is not necessary to examine in detail the content of these various press releases issued by the mea. they only indicate the government of india's understanding of the approved policy (as interpreted by orders of this court in jeddah travels (supra)). these press notes are professedly meant to be clarificatory of the approved policy. but they created more confusion than really clarifying the approved policy.19. the net result emerging from these various press notes and the orders of this court is that as a matter of fact some of the ptos (falling under either category i or ii) who should have been registered by the ministry of external affairs for consideration of their cases for allotment of haj quota for the year 2014 were wrongly denied registration and, therefore, they were not allotted any quota in that year.20. the ultimate question in this batch of matters is-what are the documents which are required to be submitted for registration as a pto qualified for being considered for allotment of quota for haj 2016?21. there is no dispute between the parties regarding the obligation of a pto to furnish various documents referred to in various stipulations of annexure 'a' of the approved policy. the dispute revolves only around the stipulation (vii). it is the common understanding of the government of india and petitioners/ptos insofar as stipulation no. (iv) is concerned, though the text of the stipulation speaks about submission of balance sheet and profit and loss account for the years 2010-2011 and 2011-2012, that stipulation is to be understood as the balance sheet and profit and loss account pertaining to the years 2013-2014 and 2014-2015 for the purpose of registration for the haj 2016.22. on the only contentious stipulation that is stipulation no. (vii), according to the government of india, when the approved policy imposes an obligation on a pto seeking registration to produce proof of the payments (made through banking or other authorized channels) towards purchase of tickets and hiring of accommodation in makkah/madinah, obviously such an obligation is with reference to the two years preceding haj 2016 in view of the orders of this court in jeddah travels (supra).23. the learned addtl. solicitor general submitted that they are not only bound by the orders of this court in rafique shaikh bhikan, 2013 (supra) and jeddah travels (supra) but also are under a constitutional duty to be satisfied that an applicant (pto for registration for haj 2016 programme) has the necessary ability and capacity (financial and infrastructural) to conduct such a programme because the safety and comfort of the haj pilgrims eventually depends upon the ability and the capacity of the ptos. it is submitted that some of the ptos did not in the past really provide the necessary services which they ought to have provided to the pilgrims. past performance of the ptos is one of the factors by which the government of india makes an assessment of the capacity of the ptos under the approved policy. the past performance of a pto is to be assessed on the basis of the documentary evidence indicated in stipulation no. (vii). such evidence proves the facts that ptos after having secured the allotment of quota did in fact conduct haj programme by actually purchasing tickets and providing appropriate accommodation for the pilgrims in makkah/madinah. therefore, any pto seeking consideration for allotment of a quota for haj 2016 must necessarily supply the documents for the years of 2014 and 2015 haj.24. on the other hand, the learned counsel for the petitioners argued that some of the petitioners who were otherwise eligible to be considered for allotment of quota for haj 2014 were wrongly denied registration and consequently they did not get any quota. therefore, calling upon them to produce proof of the fact that they had made appropriate arrangement for that particular year is not only illogical but would be asking them to perform an impossibility, apart from being an arbitrary exercise of power. therefore, their cases must be considered without insisting upon the documents for the years 2013-2014 and 2014-2015.25. in our opinion, stipulation no. (vii) does not impose a substantive obligation on a pto seeking consideration for allotment of quota by the government of india for haj programme of any particular year. it only incorporates a rule of evidence to establish the fact whether a particular pto had in fact conducted haj programme in the past.26. ptos had been in existence and conducting haj operations without any intervention by the government of india even prior to the coming into existence of the approved policy under the orders of this court in rafique shaikh bhikan, 2013 (supra). it is a different matter as to how well they had conducted the haj programmes. sometime in 20027, after the government of saudi arabia decided that only those ptos which are approved by the government of india could be given 'group visas' to perform haj operations, this whole process of the government of india considering allotment of quota to ptos started because the government is under a constitutional obligation to consider the cases of all the eligible ptos without discrimination.27. to decide upon the eligibility of ptos, certain criteria was required. therefore, the approved policy stipulated that those ptos who had conducted at least 7 haj operations or more would be considered in category-i and ptos who had conducted less than 7 haj operations would be treated as category-ii ptos. the consequence of the division of ptos into two categories is that the total number of visas to be provided by the government of saudi arabia for the pilgrims going through ptos would be distributed among the two categories in the ratio indicated in para 4 which is already taken note of. ptos which had conducted greater number of haj programmes would get a larger chunk of visas. to determine whether a particular pto falls either under category-i or category-ii, some evidence to establish the number of tours conducted by such a pto prior to the formation of the scheme is required. the best proof, as rightly identified by the government (in stipulation no. (vii) of annexure 'a'), is the evidence of payments for the air tickets and hiring of accommodation through banking or other authorized channels.28. we must note it here that stipulation (vii) is relevant only for those ptos, who are seeking registration either under category i or category ii as ptos eligible for consideration for allotment of quotas for haj programme for the first time. when an application is received from any pto for the first time, as was rightly contended by the learned additional solicitor general before this court in the jeddah travels (supra), the proof by documents specified in stipulation (vii) is required8. unfortunately, the said submission was rejected by this court. with respect we may say that we are unable to agree with the conclusion of this court in jeddah travels (supra) in this regard.29. be that as it may, but once the pto is registered either under category i or category ii insisting upon the pto to produce proof for each subsequent year or to produce documents contemplated under stipulation (vii) in our opinion is not supported either by the text of the approved policy or logic.30. the scheme was not confined only to haj 2013 and made applicable till 2017 (by orders of this court). there is always a possibility of some new ptos who were qualified to fall under category-ii in 2013 to acquire a qualification to fall in category-i in a subsequent year. for example, a pto who successfully conducted 6 haj operations prior to 2013 would fall under category-ii for the purpose of allotment of quota in haj 2013. if it did in fact secure a quota for haj 2013 and did in fact conduct haj operations for 2013 successfully, for a haj operation for any subsequent year during the currency of the approved policy a pto would be entitled to be considered as a category-i pto as by then it had conducted 7 haj operations. similarly, the ptos who facilitated 50 umrah pilgrims in a year for any five years prior to 2013 would be eligible for being considered in category-ii and for allotment of quota of haj 2013 and if it is successful in securing the quota and in conducting haj operations, in any subsequent years, it would be entitled to be considered for quota under class-i of category-ii as a pto who has conducted one haj operation.31. we have already noticed the relevant portion of the approved policy which dealt with the categorization of the ptos. the approved policy did not stipulate a condition that experience of having conducted 7 haj programmes is an experience of 7 consecutive years etc. therefore, if a pto is once registered in any one of the years, either as a category-i or category-ii pto, to call upon such ptos to furnish the documents contemplated under stipulation no. (vii) for every subsequent year, in our opinion, would not be in tune with the text of the approved policy. we are conscious of the fact that some ptos who had successfully undertaken a number of haj programmes may subsequently derelict their responsibility to the pilgrims. the government of india has ample power under the approved policy to deregister such ptos. this aspect is amply born out of the text of the policy itself. para 5 of the policy insofar as it is relevant reads as follows:5. ...the policy envisages cross-category upward movement of ptos from category ii to category i. a qualified pto shall remain qualified unless it is otherwise disqualified either by the government of india or by the government of saudi arabia for valid reasons. it is to be noted that the ptos who do not wish to take a minimum of 150 hajis or are unable to do so, need not apply.32. therefore, in our opinion, understanding of the government of india that even those ptos who had been registered either in category-i or category-ii would also be required to furnish the documents specified in stipulation no. (vii) every year when they are seeking consideration for allotment of quota of haj pilgrims is wholly illogical and contrary to the text of the approved policy. a registration for pto once made under the scheme should be valid till 2017, subject to fulfillment of other relevant stipulations under the scheme.33. ultimately, documents specified in stipulation (vii) not only go to prove a fact that a pto had in fact conducted a haj programme in a particular year, but also prove that the pto has necessary information and contacts in saudi arabia to organize an appropriate accommodation both at makkah/madinah.34. another submission of the learned additional solicitor general is required to be examined at this stage. the submission is that in the absence of such documents for the minimum two preceding years relevant to the haj programme in consideration the government would have no means of assessing the continued ability and capacity of the pto to undertake a haj operation and therefore, the government should be permitted to insist upon the production of such documents.35. this argument is to be rejected for one reason under para 4(b) of the approved policy, it is stipulated that "a qualified pto which fails to get selected under the draw of lots in any year will be allocated 150 seats in the ensuing year without umrah, if it remains a qualified pto", obviously such a pto would not be able to produce such documents with reference to that year when it failed to secure allotment of quota for haj. therefore, the assessment of its ability on the basis of its previous year performance as is sought to be argued by the learned additional solicitor general is not possible in such cases. still the government is obliged under the approved policy to grant a quota to such ptos.36. lastly, it is argued by the learned additional solicitor general based on the decision of this court in union of india and ors. etc. v. rafique shaikh bhikan and anr. etc. manu/mh/1222/2011manu/mh/1222/2011 : (2012) 6 scc 265, that this court may not interfere with the policy of the government unless it is demonstrated before us that "the condition(s) was purely subjective or designed to exclude any individual or group of private operators/travel agents i.e. bordering on malice."37. we reject the submission as the statement relied upon by the learned additional solicitor general is not an exhaustive statement of law on the subject, when it is demonstrated that the administrative action of the government of india is inconsistent with the text of the law (approved policy in this case) or that the government is making an irrational application of the law, this court is bound to interfere.38. it is submitted by the learned asg that the prime consideration in this matter should not be the individual rights of these ptos whose only motive is to secure economic benefits from the allotment of haj quota, but the safety and comfort of the haj pilgrims. government of india must have the necessary freedom to make its own assessment regarding the suitability of the pto in this regard. we do not dispute the proposition, the text of the scheme itself makes it abundantly clear that any pto once qualified shall "remain qualified unless it is otherwise disqualified.... by the government of india... for valid reasons." therefore, it is always open to the government to disqualify any registered pto for subsequent year, if there is rational complaint against the service rendered by that pto in any previous year from any one of the pilgrims of that year or any other legally tenable information or material which calls for disqualification of such a pto.39. we are left with the writ petitions of those ptos who are seeking consideration for allotment of quota for haj 2016 in the category-ii class i. their claim is that earlier that is in 2015 for the year 2015 they were allotted a quota on the ground that they were ptos falling under class-ii of category-ii, i.e. ptos which had the experience of having conducted five (5) umrah operations prior to 2015. the learned additional solicitor general submitted that under the laws of saudi arabia ptos are not permitted to conduct umrah operations unless they have a clear contract with one of the agencies duly authorised by government of saudi arabia for the purpose of conducting umrah operations and some of these ptos did not have any such contract. according to the learned asg the petitioner ptos were only sub-contractors under some ptos which were already classified as ptos falling under category-i or class-i of category-ii. they did not have any independent contract for conducting umrah operations, however, by some oversight some of them had been granted registration and quota under class-i of category-ii for the year 2015. the learned asg submitted that it does not create any right in favour of such ptos.40. whatever be the basis on which quota was allotted to these ptos for haj 2015, the fact remains that if anyone of those ptos did in fact, conduct a haj programme pursuant to the quota they would be entitled for being considered even for 2016 unless there is any other good ground for not considering their cases such as inefficient or bad service rendered to the pilgrimage during 2015 haj programme, their claims now cannot be rejected. if the respondent decides to de-register such ptos on any ground tenable in law, it is open for the respondent to de-register after giving reasonable opportunity to such ptos but until such de-registration takes place their cases must be considered for allotment of quota for haj 2016 if they are otherwise eligible.41. it is a settled principle of international law that a law of a foreign country is a pure question of fact insofar as municipal courts are concerned, we do not see any reason to doubt the statement, the government of india and therefore, we do not see any reason to grant any relief for those ptos.42. all these writ petitions are disposed of directing the respondents to consider the cases of all the ptos for allotment of quota in the light of these orders insofar as stipulation (vii) of annexure a is concerned subject to the fact that ptos are otherwise eligible in accordance with the approved scheme.writ petition(c) no. 559/2016taken on board.in view of the order passed in w.p.(c) no. 425/2016, this petition also stands disposed of.1para 27. having heard the attorney general and the counsel appearing for the different private tour operators, we approve the policy presented by the attorney general with some slight modifications. the policy, approved after modifications by this court, is enclosed as appendix i and forms part of this order. the approved policy will be called "policy for private tour operators for haj, 2013-2017". it shall remain valid for five years and shall not be questioned before any court or authority.2each pto should establish that it is a genuine and established tour operator having experience in sending tourists/pilgrims abroad for which he should produce the following documents34.24-that on 1.08.2015, the respondent after scrutinizing the application submitted by the petitioner selected the petitioner as a pto for hajj 2015 and the "certificate of registration of private tour operators for hajj 2015" was issued by the respondent to the petitioner. the petitioner conducted service for hajj 2015 without any complaint.4(2014) 14 scc 378 para 8 (hereinafter, jeddah travels)."8. clause (vii) of annexure a referred to above not having stipulated any period of time during which the requirement contemplated thereunder is required to be satisfied by a private tour operator and clause (iv) which relates to the turnover of a tour operator being confined to a period of one year out of the two available calendar years mentioned thereunder and both the clauses being relatable to a determination of the suitability of a tour operator from a similar perspective, the requirement under clause (vii) can be reasonably understood in the light of what is contained in clause (iv) i.e. financial years 2010-2011 or 2011-2012. admittedly, the private tour operators before us have been disqualified by taking into account periods of time other than what is mentioned above. that apart, if the government of india was of the view that clause (vii) had to be understood with reference to a period of three years, really, this court ought to have been approached for an appropriate clarification."52. the lists of the ptos under category i & ii who were qualified for haj-2015 may be seen at annexure i, ii & iii of the press releases of 31.7.2015 and 7.8.2015 available at the ministry's website www.mea.gov.in (link: haj 2015-(i) press release for ptos for haj 2015 dated 31.7.2015, (ii) list of ptos qualified for allocation of quota for haj 2015 dated 31.7.2015 and (iii) list of qualified ptos who did not get quota for haj 2015 due to draw of lots dated 7.8.2015). the ptos who still remain eligible as per this list may apply for registration for haj 2016 as per the laid down guidelines further, in compliance of hon'ble supreme court order on the writ petition no. 344/2015 dated 23.7.2015, 19 ptos as per enclosed list at annexure-x may also apply for registration following the laid down guidelines. these lists are subject to any further order/directions of hon'ble supreme court.3. all the terms and conditions laid down in annexure a & b will also apply on ptos that qualify under category-ii by virtue of facilitating a minimum of 50 umrah pilgrims in a year for any 5 years, but with the exception of the terms and conditions contained under clause (vii), (x), (xi) and (xii) of annexure a. in addition, these ptos are also required to submit the proof of payment made through banking or any other authorised channels towards purchase of tickets and hiring of accommodation in makkah and madinah in respect of umrah pilgrims facilitated by them in support of their claim.6para 2. the ptos who have been qualified for registration for haj-2015, is enclosed at annex-a.para 3. in addition, the hon'ble supreme court, vide its judgment dated 7th august, 2014 in the writ petitions filed by 22 ptos, has directed the ministry that clause (vii) of annexure a of the ptos policy should be read with clause (iv). the hon'ble court directed the ministry to do self-correction in this regard. therefore, the documents of the non-qualified ptos for minimum annual turnover of rs. 1 crore or above and purchase of air tickets and hiring of accommodation for haj pilgrims through banking or other authorised channels for the year 2010-11 (haj 2010) or 2011-12 (haj 2011) needed to be re-verified, in addition to other documents as indicated in annexure a and b of the ptos policy.para 4. in order to comply the directions of the hon'ble supreme court, the documents of those ptos who were given opportunity for personal hearing but were not considered qualified during 2013, have been re-verified with the assistance of the chartered accountant firm, m/s s.p. chopra & co, hired through bidding process. the documents like annual turnover of rs. 1 crore or more, minimum capital of rs. 15 lakh and documents regarding transaction through proper banking channel for purchase of air tickets for the haj pilgrims and hiring of accommodation for them in makkah/madinah pertaining to the year 2010-11(haj-2010) or 2011-12 (haj 2011) of the ptos were verified. as a result, 73 more ptos (20 under category-i and 53 under category-ii) have been qualified for registration for haj 2015. a list of the ptos qualified for registration after re-verification of the documents is enclosed at annexure b. thus, a total of 615 ptos (253 under category-i and 362 under category-ii) have been qualified for registration for haj 2015."7union of india and ors. etc. v. rafique shaikh bhikan and anr. etc. manu/mh/1222/2011manu/mh/1222/2011 : (2012) 6 scc 265. in this judgment, the following paragraphs are to be noted-5. in order to clearly understand the context in which the dispute arises a few facts are required to be taken into account. under a bilateral agreement signed between the government of india and the kingdom of saudi arabia every year, the latter government assigns a fixed number of pilgrims that are permitted to visit saudi arabia for performing haj. out of the overall number, a relatively small portion is specified for the ptos and the rest for the haj committee of india.6. before 2002, the ptos were allocated haj seats directly by the kingdom of saudi arabia and there was, therefore, no involvement of the government of india in the allocation of any haj quota to the ptos. after haj 2001, the kingdom of saudi arabia made it mandatory for the ptos to come through their respective governments. from 2002, therefore, the government of india was obliged to evolve a system under which private operators/travel agents would be registered as ptos and following the registration would be allocated quotas from the overall number of pilgrims specified for ptos. it is, thus, to be seen that a private operator/travel agent needs first to get registered as pto and it would then get a fixed number of pilgrims for carrying for haj.86. shri neeraj kishan kaul, learned additional solicitor general has vehemently contended that the requirement under the order of the court dated 16-4-2013 [f/n: union of india v. rafique shaikh bhikan manu/sc/0382/2013manu/sc/0382/2013 : (2013) 4 scc 699], is really for a seven year period, which is evident from a reading of appendix i, which is to be found in para 36 of the aforesaid order of this court.
v.n. khare, j.1. leave granted.2. the short question that arises for our consideration in this group of appeals is 'where an insured has not preferred an appeal under section 173 of the motor vehicles act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as '1988 act') against an award given by the motor accidents claims tribunal (hereinafter referred to as 'tribunal'), is it open to the insurer to prefer an appeal against the award by the tribunal questioning the quantum of the compensation, as well as finding as regards the negligence of the offending vehicle'.3. before we proceed further, it is necessary to set out brief facts of the cases, which have given rise to the aforesaid question.4. in civil appeal no. 5911/2002 @ s.l.p. (civil) no. 9238/2000, the appellant was grievously injured in a motor vehicle accident on 29.5.1993. he preferred a claim petition before the tribunal and the tribunal granted a compensation to the tune of rs. 1,50,415/- against the insurer and the insured jointly. the insurer was directed to deposit the decretal amount. the insured did not file any appeal. on appeal being filed by the insurer, the high court reduced the compensation to rs. 84,375/-. in this appeal, the appellant questioned the maintainability of the appeal preferred by the insurer.5. in civil appeal no. 4292/2002, an accident took place on 8.8.1995 in which one anil kishore roghtagi died. the dependants of the deceased filed a claim petition before the tribunal and the tribunal awarded compensation to the tune of rs. 13,13,150/- with @ 20% p.a. the appeal preferred against the said award before the high court by the insurer was dismissed on the ground that no appeal at the instance of the insurer is maintainable as regards quantum of compensation. it is against the said judgment of the high court, the insurer has preferred this appeal. when this matter came up for hearing before a bench of this court, learned judges were of the view that since two benches of this court comprising of two learned judges in rita devi and ors. v. new india assurance co. ltd. and anr. manu/sc/0312/2000manu/sc/0312/2000 : (2000)illj1656sc and united india assurance co. ltd. v. bhushan sachdeva and ors. manu/sc/0034/2002manu/sc/0034/2002 : [2002]1scr352 have taken a contrary view, the matter is required to be decided by a bench of three learned judges.6. in civil appeal no. 5913/2002 @ s.l.p (civil) no. 10616/2001, identical question of law is involved and the same has been referred to a bench of three learned judges.7. in civil appeal no. 5914/2002 @ s.l.p. (civil) no. 17076/2001, one rabinder singh lehal died in a motor accident. the dependants of the deceased preferred a claim petition before the tribunal. the tribunal awarded a compensation to the tune of rs. 2.70 lakhs in favour of the claimants. in an appeal preferred by the insurer, the high court held that the insurer cannot challenge the quantum of compensation granted by the tribunal and in that view of the matter the appeal was dismissed. it is against the said decision, the appeal has been preferred by the insurer and a bench of this court has also referred this appeal to be decided by a bench of three learned judges.8. for deciding the controversy at hand, it is necessary to set out the relevant provisions of the act."147. requirements of policies and limits of liability.- (1) in order to comply with the requirements of this chapter, a policy of insurance must be a policy which(a) is issued by a person who is an authorised insurer, or(b) insurer the person or classes of persons specified in the policy to the extent specified in sub-section (2)-(i) against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of the death of or bodily [injury to any person, including owner of the goods or his authorised representative carried in the vehicle] or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place;(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of a public service vehicle caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place:provided that a policy shall not be required-(i) to cover liability in respect of the death arising out of and in the course of his employment, of the employee of a person insured by the policy or in respect of bodily injury sustained by such an employee arising out of and in the course of his employment other than a liability arising under the workmen's compensation act, 1923 (8 of 1923) in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, any such employee-(a) engaged in driving the vehicle, or(b) if it is a public service vehicle engaged as conductor of the vehicle or in examining tickets on the vehicle, or(c) if it is a goods carriage, being carried in the vehicle or(ii) to cover any contractual liability.(2) subject to the proviso to sub-section (1), a policy of insurance referred to in sub-section (1), shall cover any liability incurred in respect of any accident, up to the following limits, namely:-(a) save as provided in clause (b), the amount of liability incurred;(b) in respect of damage to any property of a third party, a limit of rupees six thousand. provided that any policy of insurance issued with any limited liability and in force, immediately before the commencement of this act, shall continue to be effective for a period of four months after such commencement or till the date of expiry of such policy whichever is earlier.(3) a policy shall be of no effect for the purposes of this chapter unless and until there is issued by the insurer in favour of the person by whom the policy is effected a certificate of insurance in the prescribed form and containing the prescribed particulars of any condition subject to which the policy is issued and of any other prescribed matters; and different forms, particulars and matters may be prescribed in different cases.(4) where a cover note issued by the insurer under the provisions of this chapter or the rules made thereunder is not followed by a policy of insurance within the prescribed time, the insurer shall, within seven days of the expiry of the period of the validity of the cover note, notify the fact to the registering authority in whose records the vehicle to which the cover note relates has been registered or to such other authority as the state government may prescribe.(5) notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, an insurer issuing a policy of insurance under this section shall be liable to indemnify the person or classes of persons specified in the policy in respect of any liability which the policy purports to cover in the case of that person or those classes of persons.""149. duty of insurers to satisfy judgments and awards against persons insured in respect of third party risks. (1) if, after a certificate of insurance has been issued under sub-section (3) of section 147 in favour of the person by whom a policy has been effected, judgment or award in respect of any such liability as is required to be covered by a policy under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 147 (being a liability covered by the terms of the policy) [or under the provisions of section 163a] is obtained against any person insured by the policy, then, notwithstanding that the insurer may be entitled to avoid or cancel or may have avoided or cancelled the policy, the insurer shall, subject to the provisions of this section, pay to the person entitled to the benefit of the decree any sum not exceeding the sum assured payable thereunder, as if he were the judgment debtor, in respect of the liability, together with any amount payable in respect of costs and any sum payable in respect of interest on that sum by virtue of any enactment relating to interest on judgments. (2) no sum shall be payable by an insurer under sub-section (1) in respect of any judgment or award unless, before the commencement of the proceedings in which the judgment of award is given the insurer had notice through the court or, as the case may be, the claims tribunal of the bringing of the proceedings, or in respect of such judgment or award so long as execution is stayed thereon pending an appeal; and an insurer to whom notice of the bringing of any such proceedings is so given shall be entitled to be made a party thereto and to defend the action on any of the following grounds, namely:-(a) that there has been a breach of a specified condition of the policy, being one of the following conditions namely:-(i) a condition excluding the use of the vehicle(a) for hire or reward, where the vehicle is on the date of the contract of insurance a vehicle not covered by a permit to ply for hire or reward, or(b) for organised racing and speed testing, or(c) for a purpose not allowed by the permit under which the vehicle is used, where the vehicle is a transport vehicle, or(d) without side-car being attached where the vehicle is a motor cycle; or(ii) a condition excluding driving by a named person or persons or by any person who is not duly licensed, or by any person who has been disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving licence during the period of disqualification; or(iii) a condition excluding liability for injury caused or contributed to by conditions of war, civil war, riot or civil commotion; or(b) that the policy is void on the ground that it was obtained by the non-disclosure of a material fact or by a representation of fact which was false in some material particular.(3) where any such judgment as is referred to in sub-section (1) is obtained from a court in a reciprocating country and in the case of a foreign judgment is, by virtue of the provisions of section 13 of the code of civil procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) conclusive as to any matter adjudicated upon by it, the insurer (being an insurer registered under the insurance act, 1938 (4 of 1938) and whether or not he is registered under the corresponding law of the reciprocating country) shall be liable to the person entitled to the benefit of the decree in the manner and to the extent specified in sub-section (1), as if the judgment were given by a court in india.provided that no sum shall be payable by the insurer in respect of any such judgment unless, before the commencement of the proceedings in which the judgment is given, the insurer had notice through the court concerned of the bringing of the proceedings and the insurer to whom notice is so given is entitled under the corresponding law of the reciprocating country, to be made a party to the proceedings and to defend the action on grounds similar to those specified in sub-section (2).(4) where a certificate of insurance has been issued under sub-section (3) of section 147 to the person by whom a policy has been effected, so much of the policy as purports to restrict the insurance of the persons insured thereby by reference to any condition other than those in clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall, as respect such liabilities as are required to be covered by a policy under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 147, be of no effect.provided that any sum paid by the insurer in or towards the discharge of any liability of any person which is covered by the policy by virtue only of this sub-section shall be recoverable by the insurer from that person.(5) if the amount which an insurer becomes liable under this section to pay in respect of a liability incurred by a person insured by a policy exceeds the amount for which the insurer would apart from the provisions of this section be liable under the policy in respect of that liability, the insurer shall be entitled to recover the excess from that person.(6) in this section the expression "material fact" and "material particular" means, respectively a fact or particular of such a nature as to influence the judgment of a prudent insurer in determining whether he will take the risk and, if so, at what premium and on what conditions, and the expression "liability covered by the terms of the policy" means a liability which is covered by the policy or which would be so covered but for the fact that the insurer is entitled to avoid or cancel or has avoided or cancelled the policy. (7) no insurer to whom the notice referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) has been given shall be entitled to avoid his liability to any person entitled to the benefit of any such judgment or award as is referred to in sub-section (1) or in such judgment as is referred to in sub-section (3) otherwise than in the manner provided for in sub-section (2) or in the corresponding law of the reciprocating country, as the case may be.""170. impleading insurer in certain cases. where in the course of any inquiry, the claims tribunal is satisfied that-(a) there is collusion between the person making the claim and the person against who the claim is made, or(b) the person against whom the claim is made has failed to contest the claim, it may, for reason to be recorded in writing, direct that the insurer who may be liable in respect of such claim, shall be impleaded as a party to the proceeding and the insurer so impleaded shall thereupon have, without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (2) of section 149, the right to contest the claim on all or any of the grounds that are available to the person against whom the claim has been made.""173. appeals.- (1) subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) any person aggrieved by an award of a claims tribunal may, within ninety days from the date of the award, prefer an appeal to the high court:provided that no appeal by the person who is required to pay any amount in terms of such award shall be entertained by the high court unless he has deposited with it twenty-five thousand rupees or fifty per cent, of the amount so awarded, whichever is less, in the manner directed by the high court:provided further that the high court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in time.(2) no appeal shall lie against any award of a claims tribunal if the amount in dispute in the appeal is less than ten thousand rupees."9. since one of the appeal arises out of the motor vehicles act, 1939 (hereinafter referred to as the '1939 act'), we may also briefly note the provisions of 1939 act. section 96(1) of the 1939 act corresponds to section 149(1) of 1988 act which provides that after the issuance of the certificate of insurance, the insurance company shall satisfy the award or decree passed by the tribunal against the insured not exceeding the sum assured as if he were the judgment debtor. section 96(2) of 1939 act which corresponds to section 149(2) of 1988 act lays down that an insurance company can defend the action only on the ground of breach of conditions of the policy referred to in the said-section or on the ground that the policy is void for the reason referred to in the said sub-section. section 96(6) of the 1939 act corresponds to section 149(7) of the 1988 act and the same provides that the insurance company cannot avoid the liability to any person entitled to benefit of any judgment or award referred to in sub-section (1) except in the manner provided in sub-section (2) of the act.10. chapter viii of 1939 act and chapter xi of 1988 act have been enacted on pattern of several english statutes which is evident from the report 'motor vehicles insurance committee 1936-37'. in order to find out the real intention for enacting section 96 of 1939 act which corresponds to section 149 of 1988 act, it is relevant to trace the historical development of the law for compulsory third party insurance in england. prior to 1930, there was no law of compulsory insurance in respect of third party rights in england. as and when an accident took place the injured (claimant) used to bring action against the motorist for recovery of damages. but in many cases it was found the owner of the offending vehicle had no means to pay to the injured or dependant of the deceased and in such a situation the claimants were unable to recover damages. it is under such circumstances various legislations were enacted. to meet the situation, it is for the first time 'the third parties' rights against insurance act 1930' was enacted in england. the provision of the said act finds place in section 97 of 1939 act which gave to third party a right to sue directly against the insurer. subsequently, 'the road traffic act 1930' was enacted which provided for the compulsory insurance of motor vehicles. the provision of the said act is engrafted in section 95 of 1939 act and section 146 of 1988 act. it is relevant to notice that under section 38 of the english act of 1930, certain conditions of insurance policy were made ineffective so far as third parties were concerned. the object behind the said provision was that third party should not suffer on account of failure of the insured to comply with those terms of the insurance policy.11. subsequently in the 1934, second road traffic act was enacted. the object of the said legislation was to satisfy the liability of the insured. under the said enactment three actions were provided. the first was to satisfy the award passed against the insured. the second was that, in case the insurer did not discharge its liability the claimant had right to execute decree against the insurer. however, in certain events namely, what was provided in section 96(2)(a) which corresponds to section 149(2)(a) of 1988 act, the insurer could defend his liability. the third action provided for was contained in section 10(3) of the road traffic act. under the said provision, the insurer could defend his liability to satisfy decree on the ground that insurance policy was obtained due to misrepresentation or fraud. the said provision also finds place in section 149(2)(b) of 1988 act. while enacting the 1939 act and 1988 act, all the three actions have been engrafted in section 96 of 1939 act and section 149 of 1988 act. it may be remembered that neither the 1939 act nor the 1988 act conferred greater rights to the insurer than what had been conferred in english law. thus, in common law, an insurer was not permitted to contest a claim of a claimant on merits i.e. offending vehicle was not negligent or there was contributory negligence. the insurer could contest the claim only on statutory defences specified for in the statute.12. we have traced the legislative history of english law as regards liability of an insurer in the event of a motor accident in respect of third party right was not for interpreting sections 149, 170 and 173 of 1988 act, but only for showing that while enacting chapter viii of 1939 act or chapter xi of 1988 act, the intention of legislature was to protect third party rights and not the insurer.13. to answer the question, it is necessary to find out on what grounds the insurer is entitled to defend/contest against a claim by an injured or dependants of the victims of motor vehicle accident. under section 96(2) of 1939 act which corresponds to section 149(2) of 1988 act, an insurance company has no right to be a party to an action by the injured person or dependants of deceased against the insured. however, the said provision gives the insurer the right to be made a party to the case and to defend it. it is, therefore, obvious that the said right is a creature of the statute and its content depends on the provisions of the statute. after the insurer has been made a party to a case or claim, the question arises what are the defences available to it under the statute. the language employed in enacting sub-section (2) of section 149 appears to be plain and simple and there is no ambiguity in it. it shows that when an insurer is impleaded and has been given notice of the case, he is entitled to defend the action on grounds enumerated in the sub-section, namely, sub-section (2) of section 149 of 1988 act, and no other ground is available to him. the insurer is not allowed to contest the claim of the injured or heirs of the deceased on other ground which is available to an insured or breach of any other conditions of the policy which do not find place in sub-section (2) of section 149 of 1988 act. if an insurer is permitted to contest the claim on other grounds it would mean adding more grounds of contest to the insurer than what the statute has specifically provided for.14. sub-section (7) of section 149 of 1988 act clearly indicates in what manner sub-section (2) of section 149 has to be interpreted. sub-section (7) of section 149 provides that no insurer to whom the notice referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) has been given shall be entitled to avoid his liability to any person entitled to the benefit of any such judgment or award as is referred to in sub-section (1) or in such judgment as is referred to in sub-section (3) otherwise than in the manner provided for in sub-section (2) or in the corresponding law of the reciprocating country, as the case may be. the expression 'manner' employed in sub-section (7) of section 149 is very relevant which means an insurer can avoid its liability only in accordance with what has been provided for in sub-section (2) of section 149. it, therefore, shows that the insurer can avoid its liability only on the statutory defences expressly provided in sub-section (2) of section 149 of 1988 act. we are, therefore, of the view that an insurer cannot avoid its liability on any other grounds except those mentioned in sub-section (2) of section 149 of 1988 act.15. it is relevant to note that the parliament, while enacting sub-section (2) of section 149 only specified some of the defences which are based on conditions of the policy and, therefore, any other breach of conditions of the policy by the insured which does not find place in sub-section (2) of section 149 cannot be taken as a defence by the insurer. if the parliament had intended to include the breach of other conditions of the policy as a defence, it could have easily provided any breach of conditions of insurance policy in sub-section (2) of section 149. if we permit the insurer to take any other defence other than those specified in sub-section (2) of section 149, it would mean we are adding more defences to insurer in the statute which is neither found in the act nor was intended to be included.16. for the aforesaid reasons, we are of the view that the statutory defences which are available to the insurer to contest a claim are confined to what are provided in sub-section (2) of section 149 of 1988 act and not more and for that reason if an insurer is to file an appeal, the challenge in the appeal would confine to only those grounds.17. before proceeding further, it may be noticed that while 'the motor vehicles act, 1939' was in force, section 110-c(2a) was inserted therein in the year 1970 which corresponds to section 170 of the 1988 act. the said provision provides that in course of an inquiry of a claim if the tribunal is satisfied that there is a collusion between the claimant and the insured or the insured fails to contest the claim, the tribunal for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct that the insurer who may be liable in respect of such claim, shall be impleaded as a party to the proceeding and the insurer so impleaded shall thereupon have, without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (2) of section 149, the right to contest the claim on all or any of the grounds that are available to the person against whom the claim has been made.18. the aforesaid provisions show two aspects. firstly, that the insurer has only statutory defences available as provided in sub-section (2) of section 149 of 1988 act and, secondly, where the tribunal is of the view that there is a collusion between the claimant and the insured, or the insured does not contest the claim, the insurer can be made a party and on such impleadment the insurer shall have all defenses available to it. then comes the provisions of section 173 which provides for an appeal against the award given by the tribunal. under section 173, any person aggrieved by an award is entitled to prefer an appeal to the high court. very often the question has arisen as to whether an insurer is entitled to file an appeal on the grounds available to the insured when either there is a collusion between the claimants and the insured or when the insured has not filed an appeal before the high court questioning the quantum of compensation. the consistent view of this court had been that the insurer has no right to file an appeal to challenge the quantum of compensation or finding of the tribunal as regards the negligence or contributory negligence of offending vehicle.19. in shankarayya and anr. v. united india insurance co. ltd. and anr. - manu/sc/0980/1998manu/sc/0980/1998 : air1998sc2968 , it was held that an insurance company when impleaded as a party by the court can be permitted to contest the proceedings on merits only if the conditions precedent mentioned in section 170 are found to be satisfied and for that purpose the insurance company has to obtain an order in writing from the tribunal and which should be a reasoned order by the tribunal. unless this procedure is followed, the insurance company cannot have a wider defence on merits than what is available to it by way of statutory defences. in absence of the existence of the conditions precedent mentioned in section 170, the insurance company was not entitled to file an appeal on merits questioning the quantum of compensation.20. in narender kumar and anr. v. yarenissa and ors. manu/sc/1439/1998manu/sc/1439/1998 : (1998)9scc202 , question arose whether there can be a joint appeal by an insurer and owner of the offending vehicle. it was held that even in the case of a joint appeal by the insurer and the owner of an offending vehicle, if an award has been made against the tortfeasors as well as the insurer, even though an appeal filed by the insurer is not competent, it may not be dismissed as such. the tortfeasor can proceed with the appeal after the cause title is suitably amended by deleting the name of the insurer. in the said case, it also held thus:"the ground on which the insurer can defend the action commenced against the tortfeasors are limited and unless one or more of those grounds is/are available, the insurance company is not and cannot be treated as a party to the proceedings. that is the reason why the courts have consistently taken the view that the insurance company has no right to prefer an appeal under section 110-d of the act unless it has been impleaded and allowed to defend on one or more of the grounds set out in sub-section (2) of section 96 or in the situation envisaged by sub-section 2(a) of section 110-c of the act."21. in chinnama george and ors. v. n.k. raju and anr.- manu/sc/0250/2000manu/sc/0250/2000 : [2000]2scr1050 , it was held that if none of the conditions as contained in sub-section (2) of section 149 exists for the insurer to avoid the liability, the insurer is legally bound to satisfy the award and the insurer cannot be a person aggrieved by the award. in such a case, the insurer will be barred from filing an appeal against the award of the tribunal. it was also held that the insurer cannot maintain a joint appeal along with the owner or driver if defence of any ground under section 149(2) is not available to it.22. in rita devi (smt) and ors. v. new india assurance co. ltd and anr.- manu/sc/0312/2000manu/sc/0312/2000 : (2000)illj1656sc , it was held that the insurer having not obtained permission under section 170 of 1988 act, is not entitled to prefer any appeal to the high court against the award given by the tribunal on merits.23. however, in united india insurance co. ltd. v. bhushan sachdeva and ors.- manu/sc/0034/2002manu/sc/0034/2002 : [2002]1scr352 , it was held that where the insured fails to file an appeal to the high court against the quantum of compensation awarded by the tribunal, the insurer is entitled to file an appeal as the insured has failed to contest the claim and in that view of the matter, the insurer could be a person aggrieved. this is the only decision which has taken a contrary view to the consistent view of this court in regard to maintainability of appeal at the instance of an insurer. in our view, the decision in united india insurance (supra) does not lay down correct view of law for the reasons stated hereinafter.24. it was urged by learned counsel appearing for the insurance company that if an insured has not filed any appeal, it means he has failed to contest the claim and that the right to contest include the right to contest by filing an appeal against the award of the tribunal as well, and in such a situation an appeal by the insurer questioning the quantum of compensation would be maintainable.25. we have earlier noticed that motor vehicle accident claim is a tortious claim directed against tortfeasors who are the insured and the driver of the vehicle and the insurer comes to the scene as a result of statutory liability created under the motor vehicles act. the legislature has ensured by enacting section 149 of the act that the victims of motor vehicle are fully compensated and protected. it is for that reason the insurer cannot escape from its liability to pay compensation on any exclusionary clause in the insurance policy except those specified in section 149(2) of the act or where the condition precedent specified in section 170 is satisfied.26. for the aforesaid reasons, an insurer if aggrieved against an award, may file an appeal only on those grounds and no other. however, by virtue of section 170 of the 1988 act, where in course of an enquiry the claims tribunal is satisfied that (a) there is a collusion between the person making a claim and the person against whom the claim has been made or (b) the person against whom the claim has been made has failed to contest the claim, the tribunal may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, implead the insurer and in that case it is permissible for the insurer to contest the claim also on the grounds which are available to the insured or to the person against whom the claim has been made. thus, unless an order is passed by the tribunal permitting the insurer to avail the grounds available to an insured or any other person against whom a claim has been made on being satisfied of the two conditions specified in section 170 of the act, it is not permissible to the insurer to contest the claim on the grounds which are available to the insured or to a person against whom a claim has been made. thus where conditions precedent embodied in section 170 is satisfied and award is adverse to the interest of the insurer, the insurer has a right to file an appeal challenging the quantum of compensation or negligence or contributory negligence of the offending vehicle even if the insured has not filed any appeal against the quantum of compensation. sections 149, 170 and 173 are part of one scheme and if we give any different interpretation to section 172 of the 1988 act, the same would go contrary to the scheme and object of the act.27. this matter may be examined from another angle. the right of appeal is not an inherent right or common law right, but it is a statutory right. if the law provides that an appeal can be filed on limited grounds, the grounds of challenge cannot be enlarged on the premises that the insured or the persons against whom a claim has been made has not filed any appeal. section 149(2) of 1988 act limits the insurer's appeal on those enumerated grounds and the appeal being a product of the statute, it is not open to an insurer to take any other plea other than those provided in section 149(2) of 1988 act. the view taken in united india insurance co. ltd. v. bhushan sachdeva and ors. (supra) that a right to contest would also include the right to file an appeal is contrary to well established law that creation of a right to appeal is an act which requires legislative authority and no court or tribunal can confer such right, it being one of limitation or extension of jurisdiction. further, the view taken in united india insurance (supra) that since the insurance companies are nationalised and are dealing with public money/fund and to deny them the right of appeal when there is a collusion between the claimants and the insured would mean draining out or abuse of public fund is contrary to the object and intention of the parliament behind enacting chapter xi of 1988 act. the main object of enacting chapter xi of 1988 act was to protect the interest of the victims of motor vehicle accidents and it is for that reason the insurance of all motor vehicles has been made statutorily compulsory. compulsory insurance of motor vehicle was not to promote the business interest of insurer engaged in the business of insurance. provisions embodied either in 1939 or 1988 act have been purposely enacted to protect the interest of travelling public or those using road from the risk attendant upon the user of motor vehicles on the roads. if law would have provided for compensation to dependants of victims of motor vehicle accident, that would not have been sufficient unless there is a guarantee that compensation awarded to an injured or dependant of the victims of motor accident shall be recoverable from person held liable for the consequences of the accident. in skandia insurance co. ltd v. kokilaben chandravadan and ors. - : (1987)2scc645 , it was observed thus:"in other words, the legislature has insisted and make it incumbent on the user of a motor vehicle to be armed with an insurance policy covering third party risks which is in conformity with the provisions enacted by the legislature. it is so provided in order to ensure that the injured victims of automobile accidents or the dependants of the victims of fatal accidents are really compensated in terms of money and not in terms of promise. such a benign provision enacted by the legislature having regard to the fact that in the modern age the use of motor vehicles notwithstanding the attendant hazards, has become an inescapable fact of life, has to be interpreted in a meaningful manner which serves rather than defeats the purpose of the legislation. the provision has therefore to be interpreted in the light of the aforesaid perspective."28. we have noticed the legislative development in regard to third party rights in england and found that the object of those legislations was to protect the interest of third party rights. the 1939 act as well as 1988 act both were enacted on pattern of english statute with the object to relieve the distress and miseries of victims of accidents and reduce the profitability of the insurer in regard to occupational hazard undertaken by them by way of business activities and not to promote business interests of insurance companies even though they may be nationalised companies.29. for the aforesaid reasons, as well as that the learned judges in united india insurance co. ltd. (supra) have failed to notice the limited grounds available to an insurer under section 149(2) of the act, we are of the view that the decision in united india insurance (supra) does not lay down the correct view of law.30. it was then urged that if there is a collusion between the claimants and the insured or the insured does not contest the claim and the tribunal does not implead the insurance company to contest the claim on grounds available to the insured or the persons against whom claim has been made, or in such a situation when the insurer files an application for permission to contest the claim on merit and the same is rejected or where claimant has obtained an award by playing fraud, in such cases the insurer has a right of appeal to contest the award on merits and the appeal would be maintainable.31. we have already held that unless the conditions precedent specified in section 170 of 1988 act is satisfied, an insurance company has no right of appeal to challenge the award on merits. however, in a situation where there is a collusion between the claimants and the insured or the insured does not contest the claim and, further, the tribunal does not implead the insurance company to contest the claim in such cases it is open to an insurer to seek permission of the tribunal to contest the claim on the ground available to the insured or to a person against whom a claim has been made. if permission is granted and the insurer is allowed to contest the claim on merits in that case it is open to the insurer to file an appeal against an award on merits, if aggrieved. in any case where an application for permission is erroneously rejected the insurer can challenge only that part of the order while filing appeal on grounds specified in sub-sections (2) of section 149 of 1988 act. but such application for permission has to be bona fide and filed at the stage when the insured is required to lead his evidence. so far as obtaining compensation by fraud by the claimant is concerned, it is no longer res integra that fraud vitiates the entire proceeding and in such cases it is open to an insurer to apply to the tribunal for rectification of award.32. for the aforesaid reasons, our answer to the question is that even if no appeal is preferred under section 173 of 1988 act by an insured against the award of a tribunal, it is not permissible for an insurer to file an appeal questioning the quantum of compensation as well as findings as regards negligence or contributory negligence of the offending vehicle.33. for the aforesaid reasons, the order and judgment under challenge in civil appeal no. 5911/2002 @ s.l.p. (civil) no. 9238/2000 is set aside arid appeal is allowed. civil appeal no. 4292/2002, civil appeal no. 5913/2002 @ s.l.p. (civil) no. 10616/2001 and civil appeal no. 5914/2002 @ s.l.p. (civil) no. 17076/ 2001 are dismissed. there shall be no order as to costs.
u.u. lalit, j.1. leave granted. this appeal challenges the judgment and order dated 4.1.2011 passed by the high court of delhi at new delhi in crl. m.c. no. 460 of 2009.2. that the facts leading to the filing of this appeal are as under:(a) on the basis of specific information, air customs officers (preventive) at igi airport, new delhi, on 9.7.1996 recovered and seized from meal trolleys of the aircraft of lufthansa airlines flight from frankfurt to delhi, 184 gold biscuits of ten tolas each, weighing 21454.400 grams valued at ` 1,09,84,652/- concealed in the meal trolleys by two passengers, named varyam singh and ranbir singh. in their statements, varyam singh and ranbeer singh admitted the recovery and seizure of gold and named other persons involved in the incident. varyam singh, inter alia, disclosed the name of one pramod kumar i.e., the respondent herein who invested the money with him in the seized gold as well as the gold smuggled on earlier occasions.(b) varyam singh further stated that on 6.7.1996, ranbeer singh and he went to dubai where the respondent delivered two packets of gold; that they went to frankfurt; that in the flight from frankfurt to delhi with the help of ranbeer singh, he put both the packets in dry ice trays and as per pre-arrangement these packets were to be removed and delivered to him near moti bagh gurudwara by the catering staff and that he had agreed to pay ` 50,000/- for this job to that person; that he had to hand over this gold to the respondent and in return he was to get ` 2,00,000/- out of the profit; that his share of investment in the gold seized on 9.7.1996 was ` thirty two lacs and that the balance was invested by the respondent. he admitted that earlier he had gone to frankfurt via dubai and came back to delhi on six occasions and brought gold in the same manner. the authorities recorded the statements of all the persons involved. however, the statement of the respondent could not be recorded as in spite of numerous summons, he did not cooperate with the investigating authorities and remained in hiding.(c) the commissioner of customs, delhi accorded sanction on 4.9.1996 for the prosecution of the respondent, varyam singh, ranbeer singh and four others and accordingly complaint no. 66/1/96 was filed in the court of acmm, new delhi. the respondent was declared "proclaimed offender" by the ld. acmm, new delhi in the subject case.(d) in the meantime adjudicating proceedings were initiated pursuant to the show cause notice to the respondent. order in original no. 66/99 dated 30.9.1999 was passed by the additional commissioner of customs, igi airport, new delhi imposing penalty of ` 15 lacs on the respondent. following observations in the said order are noteworthy:"in response to summons shri kanwar bhan appeared before the customs authorities and he in his further voluntary statement dated 30.8.1996 recorded under section 108 of the customs act, 1962, stated that he was shown the record of details of call charges of mobile phone number 9811028643 obtained from essar cell phone mobile phone services, that on 21.4.1996 and 27.4.1996 telephone calls were made to telephone number 6914037; that he had been told that telephone number 6914037 belonged to shri varyam singh and was his residence number and who had been arrested for smuggling of 184 gold biscuits. on being asked about that he stated that neither did he know any person by name of shri varyam singh nor his telephone number on being asked about as to how telephone calls were made to telephone number 6914037 on 21.4.1996 three times and one time on 27.4.1996 from his mobile phone, he stated that he did not know the exact date but in the month of april, 1996, his younger brother shri pramod kumar came to delhi from dubai as his mother was seriously ill, it might be possible that shri pramod kumar had made four calls from his (kanwar bhan) mobile phone to telephone number 6914037 belonging to shri varyam singh as he did not know shri varyam singh and his telephone number."(e) the aforesaid order dated 30.9.1999 was carried in appeal and the commissioner of customs (appeal) vide his order dated 25.1.2008 set aside the penalty imposed on the respondent. the appellate authority was of the view that there were two persons having same name i.e., pramod kumar, one in dubai and the second being the respondent and that beyond the statement of the co-accused there was no material on record. during the course of this order it was observed as under:"if the investment was made by shri pramod kumar of dubai, then it cannot be linked to the appellant. the department has not made shri pramod kumar of dubai a party in the case and nothing is on record to suggest that efforts were made to trace and identify shri pramod kumar of dubai and how the telephone number in dubai i.e., 531228 is linked to the appellant.thus, there is only the lone statement of shri varyam singh alleging the involvement of the appellant and is not corroborated by the statement of any other person or by any documentary evidence. on the other hand the claim of the appellant that he had left india on 6.9.1994 and since then he has not visited india again is corroborated by the statements of various persons tendered under section 108 of the customs act 1962 and also by documentary evidence i.e., copies of his passports. no other person involved in the case has mentioned anything about the appellant. thus the statement of shri varyam singh who himself accepted as evidence whereas the claim of the appellant is supported by way of corroborative statements under section 108 of the customs act 1962 and documentary evidence is acceptable as credible evidence in his favour. moreover the appellant has not laid any claim on the impugned gold under seizure in this case.keeping the above in view the finding of the adjudicating authority about the appellant are not fair, legal and based on facts and hence the penalty imposed on the appellant is hereby set aside."(f) based on the observations and findings rendered in the aforesaid order dated 25.1.2008, a petition under section 482 of the code of criminal procedure being crl. m.c. no. 460 of 2009 was filed on behalf of the respondent in the high court of delhi at new delhi. it is relevant to note that in the petition itself two addresses of the respondent were given, one of dubai and the other of delhi. the affidavit in support of the petition was filed by none other than shri kanwar bhan, the brother of the respondent. it was submitted on behalf of the department that the respondent had not joined investigation and as such the instant petition did not deserve any consideration and that there were not two pramod kumars but only one person having two addresses. the high court by its judgment and order under appeal, allowed the petition and quashed complaint no. 66/1/96 pending before the additional chief metropolitan magistrate, new delhi. it was observed by the high court as under:"the entire evidence sought to be relied upon by the respondent department against the petitioner is the same, that was before the appellate authority and since the appellate authority had considered the entire evidence and come to above conclusion, i consider that no useful purpose would be served by continuing with the prosecution against the petitioner before the trial court."3. the exoneration of the respondent in the adjudication proceedings was the basis for petition under section 482, code of criminal procedure and such exoneration certainly weighed with the high court. in collector of customs v. l.r. melwani manu/sc/0279/1968manu/sc/0279/1968 : (1969) 2 scr 438 question nos. 1 and 2 posed before the constitution bench of this court were as under:"(i) whether the prosecution from which these criminal revision petitions arose is barred under article 20(2) of the constitution as against accused 1 and 2 in that case by reason of the decision of the collector of customs in the proceedings under the sea customs act?(ii) whether under any circumstance the finding of the collector of customs that the 1st and 2nd accused are not proved to be guilty operated as in issue estoppel in the criminal case against those accused?"4. the observations of the court in respect of aforesaid questions were as under:"8.....the rule laid down in that decision was adopted by this court in pritam singh v. state of punjab, and again in n.r. ghose v. state of w.b. but before an accused can call into aid the above rule, he must establish that in a previous lawful trial before a competent court, he has secured a verdict of acquittal which verdict is binding on his prosecutor. in the instant case for the reasons already mentioned, we are unable to hold that the proceeding before the collector of customs is a criminal trial. from this it follows that the decision of the collector does not amount to a verdict of acquittal in favour of accused 1 and 2."5. a subsequent three-judge bench in k.g. premshankar v. inspector of police manu/sc/0771/2002manu/sc/0771/2002 : (2002) 8 scc 87 : 2002 (45) acc 920 (sc) considered the effect of the decision of a civil court on criminal proceedings and it was concluded as under:"30. what emerges from the aforesaid discussion is.--(1) the previous judgment which is final can be relied upon as provided under sections 40 to 43 of the evidence act; (2) in civil suits between the same parties, principle of res judicata may apply; (3) in a criminal case, section 300, code of criminal procedure makes provision that once a person is convicted or acquitted, he may not be tried again for the same offence if the conditions mentioned therein are satisfied; (4) if the criminal case and the civil proceedings are for the same cause, judgment of the civil court would be relevant if conditions of any of sections 40 to 43 are satisfied, but it cannot be said that the same would be conclusive except as provided in section 41. section 41 provides which judgment would be conclusive proof of what is stated therein.31. further, the judgment, order or decree passed in a previous civil proceeding, if relevant, as provided under sections 40 and 42 or other provisions of the evidence act then in each case, the court has to decide to what extent it is binding or conclusive with regard to the matter(s) decided therein...32. in the present case, the decision rendered by the constitution bench in m.s. sheriff case would be binding, wherein it has been specifically held that no hard-and-fast rule can be laid down and that possibility of conflicting decision in civil and criminal courts is not a relevant consideration. the law envisages.'such an eventuality when it expressly refrains from making the decision of one court binding on the other, or even relevant, except for limited purpose such as sentence or damages'".6. the exoneration in related adjudication proceedings and the effect thereof on criminal proceedings again came up for consideration before a three-judge bench of this court in radheshyam kejriwal v. state of west bengal and anr. manu/sc/0134/2011manu/sc/0134/2011 : (2011) 3 scc 581. in his dissenting opinion p. sathasivam, j., (as the learned chief justice then was) concluded that there was nothing in foreign exchange regulation act, 1973 to indicate that a finding in adjudication is binding on a court in prosecution under section 56 of act or that the prosecution under section 56 depended upon the result of the adjudication under the act. c.k. prasad j., speaking for the majority summed up as under:"38. the ratio which can be culled out from these decisions can broadly be stated as follows:(i) adjudication proceedings and criminal prosecution can be launched simultaneously;(ii) decision in adjudication proceedings is not necessary before initiating criminal prosecution;(iii) adjudication proceedings and criminal proceedings are independent in nature to each other;(iv) the finding against the person facing prosecution in the adjudication proceedings is not binding on the proceeding for criminal prosecution;(v) adjudication proceedings by the enforcement directorate is not prosecution by a competent court of law to attract the provisions of article 20(2) of the constitution or section 300 of the code of criminal procedure;(vi) the finding in the adjudication proceedings in favour of the person facing trial for identical violation will depend upon the nature of finding: if the exoneration in adjudication proceedings is on technical ground and not on merit, prosecution may continue; and(viii) in case of exoneration, however, on merits where the allegation is found to be not sustainable at all and the person held innocent, criminal prosecution on the same set of facts and circumstances cannot be allowed to continue the underlying principle being the higher standard of proof in criminal cases."7. the majority judgment in radheyshyam kejriwal v. state of west bengal and anr. manu/sc/0134/2011manu/sc/0134/2011 : (2011) 3 scc 581 is relied upon by the respondent in support of the submission that the exoneration in the present case being on merits, criminal prosecution on the same set of facts ought not to be allowed to continue. ms. ranjana nara-yan, learned advocate appeared for the appellant while mr. naveen malhotra, learned advocate appeared for the respondent. we have considered rival submissions and gone through the record which brings out following crucial facets:(a) the order in original dated 30.9.1999 referred to the statement of kanwar bhan, the brother of the respondent, which clearly suggests that the respondent had come down to delhi in april, 1996. this statement is not even referred to in the appellate order dated 30.9.1999 but a finding is rendered that the respondent had not visited india after september, 1994.(b) the respondent was declared a proclaimed offender and had not participated in any of the proceedings personally. in the circumstances no weightage could be given to copies of the passport submitted in support of the assertion that he had not visited india after september 1994.(c) the appellate order further discloses that the statement of varyam singh did allege the involvement of the respondent. in law, if such statement is otherwise admissible and reliable, conviction can lawfully rest on such material.(d) the finding in the appellate order that there were two pramod kumars, is completely incorrect and unstatable.in the back drop of these facts it cannot be accepted that the exoneration of the respondent in the adjudication proceeding was on merits or that he was found completely innocent.considering the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the view that the high court was not right and justified in accepting the prayer for quashing of the proceedings. we, therefore, allow this appeal and set-aside the view taken by the high court. case no. 66/1/96, on the file of the acmm, new delhi, shall be proceeded with, in accordance with law.
ashok bhan, j.1. it is regrettable that in spite of being cautioned four times by this court not to challenge election of the president of india in a cavalier and light hearted manner, the petitioner, who is an advocate has filed the present election petition challenging the election of dr. a.p.j. abdul kalam (respondent no. 1) as president of india on the same similar grounds of challenge which stand concluded against him in petitioner's own cases by several decisions of this court. our regret is compounded by the fact that petitioner is an advocate. he does, we presume, know the value of earlier binding precedents declaring the law by the highest court of the land.2. this judgment shall dispose of election petition no. 1 of 2002 and special leave petition no. 22385 of 2002. the facts are being stated from the election petition which covers and takes care of the points raised in the special leave petition as well.3. petitioner has challenged the election of respondent no. 1 of the office of the president of india which was held in pursuance to the notification dated 11th june, 2002 published by the returning officer shri r.c. tripathi, secretary general, rajya sabha. the said election was conducted under the provisions of presidential and vice-presidential elections act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as 'the act'), and the presidential and vice-presidential election rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as 'the rules').4. in all 54 nomination papers were filed within the time prescribed. respondent no. 1 was nominated by the ruling national democratic alliance and its allies and the main opposition party, i.e., the indian, national congress(i) and its allies whereas captain lakshmi sehgal, respondent no. 2, was sponsored and nominated by cm(m) and its allied parties.5. scrutiny of the nomination papers in connection with the presidential election, 2002 was conducted on 26th of june, 2002 by the returning officer. nomination papers of all candidates other than respondent no. 1 & 2 were rejected. nomination paper of the petitioner was rejected on the ground that the same was not accompanied by a certified copy of the entry relating to the candidate in the electoral roll and that the requirements of law were incomplete for want of proposers and seconders. petitioner had filed his written objections to the two sets of nomination papers filed by respondent no. 1 which were duly considered and rejected being without any substance. the poll for the contest between respondent no. 1 & 2 took place on 15th july, 2002. respondent no. 1 was declared elected as the president of india having received majority of votes. the result of the said election was declared in extraordinary gazette of india of 18th july, 2002 declaring dr. a.p.j. abdul kalam, respondent no. 1, as elected to the office of the president of india. respondent no. 1 took oath of the office of the president of india on 25th july, 2002.6. on 10th of july, 2002, petitioner filed c.w.p. no. 4119 of 2002 under article 226/227 of the constitution of india in the high court of judicature at new delhi challenging the rejection of his nomination paper and the acceptance of the nomination papers of respondent nos. 1 & 2 herein and the constitutional validity of various provisions of the act and the rules and section 29a of the representation of peoples act, 1951 being violative of articles 14, 21, 38, 54, 71(1)(3), 79, 80(1) and 324 of the constitution of india. the said writ petition was dismissed by a division bench of the high court of delhi by a detailed order on 12th july, 2002. special leave petition (civil) no. 22385 of 2002 arises from the said decision of the high court of delhi.7. the election petition no. 1 of 2002 has been filed seeking a declaration that the result of the election declaring respondent no. 1 as the duly elected president of india be declared void for illegal rejection of the nomination paper of the petitioner and the illegal acceptance of the nomination paper of the respondent no. 1. the various provisions of the act and the rules being ultra vires the constitution of india to which the challenge was laid before the high court in the writ petition has been laid in the election petitions as well.8. part ii of the act (sections 3 to 12) contains provisions relating to the conduct of president and vice-presidential elections. section 3 provides that the election commission for the purpose of each election of the president and vice-president shall, in consultation with the central government, appoint a returning officer having his office in new delhi and may also appoint one or more assistant returning officer. under section 4(1) the election commission by notification is to issue the election programme prescribing the last date for filing the nominations, the date for scrutiny of nominations, last date of the withdrawal of candidature and the date on which a poll shall, if necessary, take place. section 5 provides for giving of a public notice of election by the returning officer after the issuance of the notification under sub-section (1) of section 4. section 5a prescribes that any person may be nominated for election to the office of president or vice-president if he is qualified to be elected to that office under the constitution. section 5b provides for presentation of nomination papers and lays down the requirement for a valid nomination. sub-section 1 of section 5 requires that nomination papers completed in the prescribed form must be subscribed by candidate as assenting to the nomination. in clause (a) of section 5(1), as it stood prior to 5.6.1997, prescribed that in case of presidential election, the nomination papers shall also be subscribed by at least ten electors as proposers and at least ten electors as seconders. section 5b(2) lays down that each nomination paper shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the entry relating to the candidate in the electoral roll for the parliamentary constituency in which the candidate is registered as an elector. any nomination paper which is not accompanied by the certified copy is required to be rejected under section 5b(4). section 5c, prior to 5.6.1997, prescribed that a candidate shall not be deemed to be duly nominated for election unless he deposits or causes to be deposited a sum of two thousand five hundred rupees. section 5e makes provisions for scrutiny of nomination papers by the returning officer ground (c) of section 5e(3) provides for rejection of a nomination paper if it is not subscribed by the required number of proposers or seconders and ground (e) provides for rejection of the nomination papers on the ground of failure to comply with any of the provisions of section 5b or section 5c. section 8 lays down the procedure in contested and uncontested elections. section 9 provides for manner of voting at the elections and section 10 deals with counting of votes. section 11 provides for declaration of results on the completion of counting of votes.9. by act 35/97 in clause (a) of section 5b instead of 10 proposers and 10 seconders, provisions have been made that in the case of election of the office of president there should be at least 50 electors as proposers and at least 50 electors as seconders. in section 5c the deposit amount was increased from rs. 2,500/- to rs. 15,000/-.10. part iii of the act (section 13 to 20) contains provisions relating to disputes regarding elections. section 13(a) defines "candidate" to mean a person who has been or claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate at an election. section 14(1) provides that no election shall be called in question except by presenting an election petition to the authority specified in sub-section 2. this court has been specified as the authority to try the election petition. sub-section 1 of section 14(a) lays down that an election petition can either be presented by any candidate at such election, or in the case of presidential election, by twenty or more electors joined together as petitioners. section 18 prescribes the grounds on which the election of a returned candidate can be declared to be void. clause (c) of section 18 with which we are concerned provides that the election can be declared to be void if the nomination of a candidate has been wrongly rejected or the nomination of the successful candidate has been wrongly accepted.11. we did not deem it necessary to issue notice in these petitions as the points raised in the election petition as well as in the special leave petition already stand concluded by the previous judgment of this court.12. section 14 of the act provides that no election shall be called in question except by presenting an election petition to the authority specified in sub-section (2). sub-section (2) specifies that the supreme court of india shall have the jurisdiction to try an election petition. sub-section (3) provides that every election petition shall be presented to such authority in accordance with the provisions of this part and of the rules made by the supreme court under article 145. part vii, order xxxix of the rules made by this court, known as supreme court rules, 1966, contains rules relating to election petition filed under part iii of section 14(3) of the act. rules 2 of the order xxxix lays down that an application calling in question an election shall only be by a petition made and presented in accordance with the provisions of this order. rules 34 provides that subject to the provisions of this order or any special order or directions of the court, the procedure in an election petition shall follow, as nearly as may be, the procedure in proceedings before the court in the exercise of this original jurisdiction. thus the procedure contained in part iii of the rules of this court including order xxiii relating to the institution of suits by plaints, applies to the proceedings commenced by election petitions after reading the word "petition" for "plaint". rule 6 of these rules provides that this court, after the plaint has been presented to the registrar and numbered, shall rejected the plaint "where it does not disclose a cause of action", or where "the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law". since the points raised in this petition stand concluded by the previous judgments of this court we have not deemed it necessary to issue notice and dispose of the petition at the preliminary stage. the points which arise for consideration before us are:(1) does the petitioner have a locus standi to maintain his election petition, or in other words, is he duly nominated candidate in accordance with provisions of sections 5b and 5c of the presidential and vice presidential elections act?(2) has the petition put a valid challenge to the validity of sections 5b and 5c of the act or any other provisions of the act and the rules?(3) is the petition maintainable?13. article 54 of the constitution of india provides that the president shall be elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the elected members of both houses of parliament and the elected members of the legislative assemblies of the states. the manner of election of the president is based on proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote by secret ballot. article 71 lays down as follows:"71. matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a president or vice-president.- (1) all doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election of a president or vice-president shall be inquired into and decided by the supreme court whose decision shall be final.(2) if the election of a person as president or vice-president is declared void by the supreme court, acts done by him in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of the office of president or vice-president as the case may be, on or before the date of the decision of the supreme court shall not be invalidated by reason of that declaration.(3) subject to the provisions of this constitution, parliament may be law regulate any matter relating to or connected with the election of a president or vice-president.(4) the election of a person as president or vice-president shall not be called in question on the ground of the existence of any vacancy for whatever reason among the members of the electoral college electing him."14. to carry out the purpose of article 71(3) of the constitution of india the presidential and vice-presidential election act, 1952 was enacted by parliament. the grounds on which the election can be questioned as well as the mode of questioning it were laid down by the act. section 14a of the act provides an election petition calling in question an election may be presented on one or more of the grounds specified in sub-section (1) of section 18 and section 19 to the supreme court by any candidate at such election or in the case of presidential election by 20 or more electors joined as petitioners. section 13(a) of the act defines the 'candidate' to mean a person who has been or claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate at an election.15. the petitioner admits in his petition that he was not duly nominated as per requirement of the provisions of section 5b of the act which provides that each candidate shall:"...deliver to the returning officer at the placed specified in this benefit in the public notice issued under section 5 a nomination paper completed in the prescribed form and subscribed by the candidate as assenting to the nomination, and(a) in the case of presidential election, also by at least fifty electors as proposers and at least fifty electors as seconders;(b) in the case of vice-presidential election, also by at least twenty electors as proposers and at least twenty electors as seconders:provided that no nomination paper shall be presented to the returning officer on a day which is a public holiday.x x x16. again section 5c provides that:"5c. (1) a candidate shall not be deemed to be duly nominated for election unless he deposits or causes to be deposited a sum of fifteen thousand rupees;provided that where a candidate has been nominated by more than one nomination paper for the same election not more than one deposit shall be required of him under this sub-section.x x x17. nomination paper of the petitioner was rejected on the ground that it was proposed and seconded by the requisite numbers of proposers and seconders. this point was examined exhaustively by this court in the case of very petitioner now before us against the former president neelam sanjeeva reddy charan lal sahu v. neelam sanjeeva reddy, manu/sc/0401/1978manu/sc/0401/1978 : [1978]3scr1 and it was held that:"the result of a careful consideration by us of the provisions mentioned above is that we think that, the procedure or manner for questioning the presidential election having been laid down, the petitioner must come within the four corners of that procedure in order to have a locus standi to challenge the presidential election and to be able to maintain this petition. if he neither is nor can claim to be a candidate, on assertions made by him in his petition itself, he would be lacking the right to question the election of shri neelam sanjeeva reddy as presidential of india. the effect of the provisions of sections 14(1), 14(2) and 14(3) and 14a(1) of the act, read with order xxxix, rules 2 and 5 of the rules of this court, is that the petition before us is barred because the petitioner has not got the required locus standi to maintain it."18. again in charan lal sahu v. giani zail singh, manu/sc/0204/1983manu/sc/0204/1983 : [1984]2scr6 , the point raised by the petitioner on the second limb of section 13(a) of the act defining the candidate to mean' "claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate" was rejected. rejecting the said contention this court observed:"the petitioners, however, contend that even if it is held that they were not duly nominated as candidates, their petitions cannot be dismissed on that ground since they "claim to have been duly nominated". it is true that, in the matter of claim to candidacy, a person who claims to have been duly nominated is on par with a person who, in fact, was duly nominated. but, the claim to have been duly nominated cannot be made by a person whose nomination paper does not comply with the mandatory requirements of section 5b(1)(a) of the act. that is to say, a person whose nomination paper, admittedly, was not subscribed by the requisite number of electors as proposers and seconders cannot claim that he was duly nominated. such a claim can only be made by a person who can show that his nomination paper conformed to the provisions of section 5b and yet it was rejected, that is, wrongly rejected by the returning officer. to illustrate, if the returning officer rejects a nomination paper on the ground that one of the ten subscribes who had proposed the nomination is not an elector, the petitioner can claim to have been duly nominated if he proves that the said proposer was in fact an 'elector'.thus, the occasion for a person to make a claim that he was duly nominated can arise only if his nomination paper complies with the statutory requirement which govern the filing of nomination papers and not otherwise. the claim that he was 'duly' nominated necessarily implies and involves the claim that his nomination paper conformed to the requirements of the statute. therefore, a contestant whose nomination paper is not subscribed by at least ten electors as proposers and ten electors as seconders, as required by section 5b(1)(a) of the act, cannot claim to have been duly nominated, any more than a contestant who had not subscribed his assents to his own nomination can. the claim of a contestant that he was duly nominated must arise out of his compliance with the provisions of the act. it cannot arise out of the violation of the act. otherwise, a person who had not filed nay nomination paper at all but who had only informed the returning officer orally that he desired to contest the election could also contend that he "claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate".19. the question regarding locus standi was examined for the third time in the election petition filed by the petitioner in charan lal sahu v. k.r. narayanan and ors., manu/sc/0877/1998manu/sc/0877/1998 : air1998sc1506 , it was again reiterated that:"in view of the decisions referred to above, it must be held that neither of the petitioners was a "candidate" as the said expression is defined in section 2(d) of the act since neither of them had been duly nominated nor could he claim to have been nominated as a candidate inasmuch as the nomination papers filed by both of them did not comply with the mandatory requirements of section 5b(1)(a) of the act and the nomination paper of petitioner 2 was filed without complying with the requirements of section 5b(2) of the act. on that view it must be held that neither of the petitioners has the locus standi to maintain the petition."20. in view of the authoritative pronouncements of this court the petitioner cannot be regarded as a person who had been nominated or can claim to have duly nominated as candidate at the election in question. his nomination papers were thus rightly rejected by the returning officer and the petition on his behalf is, therefore, not maintainable.21. question regarding the constitutional validity of sections 5b and 5c before its amendment by act no. 35 of 1997 which provided that there should be at least ten electors as proposers and ten electors as seconders was examined in fakruddin ali ahmed's case (supra) and neelam sanjeeva reddy's case (supra). the validity of these two sections as they existed then was upheld. the validity of amending act no. 35 of 1997 amending sections 5b and 5c providing for at least fifty electors as proposers and seconders instead of ten proposers and seconders as provided prior to the amendment was questioned in k.r. narayanan case (supra). the same was rejected and these two provisions were held to be intra vires. it was held:"as regards the submission urged on behalf of the petitioners regarding the validity of the provisions of sections 5b and 5c as they stood prior to 5-6-1997, it may be stated that the validity of the said provisions has been upheld by this court in charan lal sahu v. fakruddin ali ahmed manu/sc/0261/1974manu/sc/0261/1974 : air1975sc1288 ; charan lal sahu v. s. neelam sanjeeva reddy and charan lal sahu v. giani zail singh. petitioner 1 was a party to all these decisions. the challenge to the validity of the amendments introduced by the ordinance and the amendment act has been negatived by this court in the three writ petitions referred to above, two out of which were field by petitioner 1. the petitioners have urged that in this petition the challenge to the validity of section 5b is based on the ground that it violates the principle of secrecy of ballot incorporated in article 55(3) of the constitution and that this ground has not been considered in the earlier decisions. we do not find any merit in this contention. the requirement in section 5b(1)(a) about the nomination paper being subscribed by a particular number of electors as proposers and seconders does not, in any way, involve the infringement of the secrecy of ballot at the election inasmuch as the elector who has subscribed the nomination paper of a person as a proposer or as a seconder is free to cast his vote in favour of any candidate and is not bound to vote for the person whose nomination paper he has subscribed as a proposer or seconder. the identity of the candidate in whose favour he has cast his vote is not be disclosed."22. the contention on the question as to whether there was a conflict between articles 58 and 71 of the constitution of india was also rejected in neelam sanjeeva reddy's case (supra) by observing thus:"it is clear to us that article 58 only provides the qualifications or conditions for the eligibility of a candidate. it has nothing to do with the nomination of a candidate which requires ten proposers and ten seconders. we think that in the case of an election to such a high office as that of the president of india, it is quite reasonable to lay down the condition that a person who is allowed to contest the election as a candidate must have at least ten proposers and ten seconders from amongst hundreds of electors who are legislators. we think that the subject-matter of section 5b and 5c is completely covered by the provisions of article 71(1) of the constitution set out above. we also think that there is no force in the contention that sections 5b and 5c of the act are in conflict with article 14 of the constitution. the conditions laid down in sections 5b and 5c apply to all persons who want to be candidates at a presidential election without any discrimination. they prima facie imposed reasonable conditions to be observed by any person who wants seriously to contest at a presidential election. hence, this provision would be valid even apart from article 71(3) of the constitution."23. every conceivable challenge of these provisions has already been upheld by this court in the aforesaid three judgments in the petitioner's own case and in mithilesh kumar sinha v. returning officer for presidential election, 1993 (suppl. (4) scc 386. we need not examine these points any further in view of the consistent view of this court with which we respectfully agree.24. another contention which just needs to be noticed and rejected is regarding the validity of the procedure prescribed under the act and the rules for holding the election of the president and vice-president or its being ultra vires the constitution of india. the procedure laid under the act and the rules has already been upheld in the judgments, already referred to.25. objections to the validity of the nomination paper filed by respondent no. 1 which was rejected by the returning officer are so frivolous that they do not require attention of this court. in our opinion, returning officer rightly overruled the objections filed by the petitioner questioning the validity of the nomination paper filed by respondent no. 1.26. before we conclude, we would like to advert to an aspect which was specifically pointed out by this court in k.r. narayanan's case (supra) which cannot be ignored rather needs to be highlighted again. it was observed that before filing the said election petition the petitioner had earlier filed four election petitions challenging the election of the returned candidates in the presidential elections held in the year 1974, 1977, 1982 and 1997. all these election petitions were dismissed on the grounds that the petitioner had not locus standi to maintain the election petition. this court in k.r. narayanan's case (supra) after referring to the observations made in the earlier judgments that frivolous election petitions on the same very ground should not be filed, while dismissing the petition, imposed the cost of rs. 10,000/-. coming down heavily against the filing of such frivolous election petitions it was observed:"we find that these observations have had no effect. this election petition which has been jointly filed by the two petitioners shows no improvement. it suffers from the same defects as the earlier petitions filed by the petitioners. it seems that the petitioners are obsessed with a desire that they should find a place in some book of records. they find the temptation to file an election petition after the presidential election too difficult to resist. it is a matter of regret that petitioner 1, who happens to be an advocate himself has been persisting in his pastime knowing well that such conduct on his part amounts to an abuse of the process of law. this court has so far refrained from imposing costs in the election petitions that were filed by the petitioners earlier. it is high time that the petitioners who have persisted in filing this petition in spite of the law laid down authoritatively by this court in the earlier decisions are saddled with costs."27. it seems that the petitioners, although an advocate, has not learnt any lesson from the observations made by this court in the earlier judgments and that is why we have begun the judgment with the observation that such a conduct on the part of the petitioner who happens to be an advocate is regrettable. we hope he does not do so again.28. for the reasons stated above, we do not find any merit either in the election petition or in the special leave petition against the judgment of the high court of delhi and dismiss them with costs which are assessed on rs. 25,000/- in each case. the costs so deposited shall be transferred to the supreme court legal services committee. it is also directed that no petition filed by the petitioner-in-person shall be entertained in this court till the amount of costs imposed is deposited.
a.k. sikri, j.1. leave granted.2. on 18th march, 2009, a police squad working under the lokayukta of karnataka state, raided certain places and house of certain police officers including that of hemant madhukar nimbalkar (hereinafter referred to as the 'complainant'). after the said raid, the lokayukta held a press conference in which he stated that the complainant, who was an ips officer and posted as superintendent of police with charge of anti-terrorist squad, had collected assets in the region of rs. 250 crores. in the process, the lokayukta discussed the details of the raid on the properties belonging to the complainant situate in mumbai, kolhapur and belgaum. the press statement issued by the lokayukta was widely reported the very next day in a number of prominent national as well as local newspapers, like indian express, hindu, times of india etc.3. sakal newspaper, which is a marathi newspaper also carried and published this news item. kolhapur edition of this newspaper dated 19th march, 2009 records the version of the lokayukta. likewise, statements given by the lokayukta also appeared in belgaum, pune, nasik and aurangabad editions of sakal newspaper.4. kolhapur edition also carried out another separate news item under the caption 'rich from silver and elephant teeth smuggling'. under this news item, it was, inter alia, mentioned that the complainant had collected money from silver and elephant teeth smuggling which came to the knowledge of the newspaper from reliable sources. description was also given about his modest background leading very ordinary life during his tenure as the student and amassing wealth over a period of time through the aforesaid smuggling activities which made him rich.it was also stated that he had thrown a huge new year eve party, about three years ago, spending more than 25 lakhs of rupees.likewise, in belgaum edition, after reproducing the statement given by the lokayukta, details of various properties owned by the complainant were given.on 19th march, 2009, the editorial was published in sakal newspaper with the heading 'police "dog" millionaire'. in this editorial, reference was made to the oscar winning movie "slum dog millionaire". it was stated that though there was no comparison between the story of 'jamal', the leading character in the said film and the complainant insofar as acquisition of wealth by the complainant is concerned, but insofar as the complainant is concerned, it was mystifying story that one boy in the middle class family becomes ips officer and collects property worth rs. 250 crores within eight to ten years. the particulars of the properties acquired by the complainant with their value were mentioned and the editorial also highlighted increase in crime in white collar high class persons with no limit of corruption.to the similar effect were the news published in e-editorial of this newspaper. according to the complainant, the news was very offensive and contained libelous satire against him generally, and in particular in the following lines:much discussion was held on the word "dog" in the name of movie but in police machinery there are many such "dogs" and they are likelihood of "dog" and such is situation. the one who should protect law they have become "eater" becoming violating and this is not new to this country. the roots of corruption and bribe are deep rooted from delhi to all over in small lanes also. there is no fear of law. from this it is clear that corruption is becoming social mannerism.5. the complainant, feeling agitated by the aforesaid publications in different editions of sakal newspaper, filed the complaint before the chief judicial magistrate, kolhapur under section 501, 502 and 504 read with section 34 of the indian penal code on 5th november, 2009. in this complaint apart from the four editors of the four editions of the newspaper at kolhapur, belgaum, pune and nasik, mr. abhijit pawar (hereinafter referred to as the 'a-1), managing director of sakal newspaper and mr. pratap rao govind rao pawar (hereinafter referred to as the 'a-2), chairman of this group of newspapers (who incidentally is father of abhijit pawar) were also arrayed as accused persons. in the complaint a-1 abhijit pawar is described generally as "managing director editor of sakal papers ltd.". he is also described as printer and publisher of pune edition. under statutory declaration, he is described a printer and publisher of the pune edition. a-2 is described as chairman of sakal papers ltd. a-3 to a-6 are described as editors of various editions. a-3, navneet deshpande, is described as executive editor of pune edition and accused no. 5 yamaji malkar as editor for pune edition.6. verification in respect of this complaint was carried out on 17th november, 2009 wherein a-1 is described as 'managing director and editor' of sakal. after recording of the aforesaid verification statement of the complainant, the chief judicial magistrate, kolhapur, i.e., the trial court issued process against all the accused persons on 24th november, 2009. being aggrieved by the said order of issuance of process, all the accused persons challenged that order by filing criminal revision before the sessions court. this was, however, dismissed by the court of sessions on 26th february, 2010.7. as a-1 did not appear before the trial court even after the dismissal of the criminal revision application, on 14th june, 2010 bailable warrants were issued against him. not satisfied with the dismissal of the criminal revision petition and aggrieved by the issuance of the bailable warrants, both a-1 and his father, a-2 approached the high court of bombay by way of their respective criminal writ petitions. these writ petitions were clubbed together for hearing and have been decided by the common judgment dated 6th november, 2012. vide this judgment, whereas the writ petition of a-1 has been dismissed, that of a-2 was allowed.8. it is in this backdrop that a-1 has filed the criminal appeal arising out of special leave petition (criminal) no. 9318 of 2012.9. against that part of the order of the high court by which proceedings against a-2 have been quashed, it is the complainant who has come up to this court by filing criminal appeal arising out of special leave petition (crl.) no. 9860 of 2012.10. mr. ashok desai and mr. sidharth luthra, learned senior counsel appearing for a-1 have made four-fold submissions while questioning the order of issuance of process passed by the trial court which is affirmed by the high court. these are:(i) provisions of (cr.p.c.) are ignored and not complied with by the trial court while issuing the process. it is submitted that the procedure stipulated in the said provision is mandatory which imposes an obligation on the magistrate to ensure that before summoning an accused, who resides beyond his jurisdiction, the magistrate shall make necessary inquiries into the case himself or direct investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks fit for finding out whether or not there is sufficient ground to proceed against the accused. it was submitted that indisputably a-1 resides outside the jurisdiction of the trial court at kolhapur as he is resident of pune.11. it is also argued that the order does not contain even the minimum reasoning necessary for issuance of such process as required in law explained in subramaniam swamy v. union of india (2016) 1 scc 221.the learned counsel laid great emphasis on the amendment in section 202, code of criminal procedure in the year 2005 whereby special provision was made mandating due care to be taken by the magistrate in respect of those persons residing at a place beyond the area in which the magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, to ensure that innocent persons are not harassed by unscrupulous persons. it was pointed out that this was avowed objective behind this amendment specifically noted and explained by this court in national bank of oman v. barakara abdul aziz manu/sc/1123/2012manu/sc/1123/2012 : (2013) 2 scc 488.some more judgments in support of the aforesaid arguments were also referred to, which will be taken note of at the appropriate stage.(ii) second argument of the appellant was that there is no vicarious liability in criminal defamation and a person can be held liable only for his own act where he has the necessary mens rea, i.e., criminal mind. it was submitted that a-1 was, in fact, placed in the same position as a-2 and, therefore, the high court should have quashed the process against a-1 as well, on the parity of reasoning adopted in the case of a-2.to buttress this submission, the learned counsel took aid of the judgment of this court in maharashtra state electricity distribution co. ltd. v. datar switchgear ltd. (2010) (1) scc 479 laying emphasis, in particular, on para 13 of the said judgment which reads as under:30. it is trite law that wherever by a legal fiction the principle of vicarious liability is attracted and a person who is otherwise not personally involved in the commission of an offence is made liable for the same it has to be specifically provided for in the statute concerned.(iii) taking the aforesaid argument of vicarious liability further, by giving it another dimension, it was submitted that the provisions of the press and registration of books act, 1861 (hereinafter referred to as the 'press act') take care of such situations thrusting the responsibility on the person who is declared as 'editor' in the prescribed format under the said act and making the said declared editor responsible for these acts. it was submitted that section 2(1) of the press act defines 'editor' and as per the provisions of the section, such a declaration is prima facie evidence in any legal proceedings, whether civil or criminal, about the person on whom the responsibility for the wrongful civil or criminal can be foisted upon. it was argued that besides the editor, other persons like the printer or publisher of a newspaper cannot be held liable for the wrongful acts, more particularly, when it comes to criminal prosecution. otherwise, it would create a chilling effect in the freedom of speech. in this hue, it was submitted that section 7, which talks of declaration to be prima facie evidence in any legal proceedings, whether whatever civil or criminal, only refers to a presumption that the declaration is sufficient evidence about the person who is shown to have certain status as a printer and/or publisher to be regarded as a printer and/or editor or publisher. this is a rebuttable presumption and, in any case, it does not involve any automatic criminal liability. in fact the courts have been meticulous and have even regarded that a title like chief editor or executive editor would not make that person liable as an editor, it is pointed out that in the present case, the description of a-1 is "managing director editor".it was also submitted that the printer and publisher has no role in selection of the material to be published. further in the present case there are successive reports in many newspapers all over india. so there is nothing special about this publication, to attract any vicarious liability.referring to the judgment in the case of ramesh chand aggarwal v. state of haryana and anr.1, it was argued that the court held that if a person is not shown to be as 'editor', no presumption can be drawn. it needs a positive assertion of knowledge of the objectionable character of the matter and that it is published with his consent. in the aforesaid case, the petition of printer and publisher had been allowed. the matter came to this court and the court held that there were no legal and valid grounds for interference. the learned counsel also placed reliance on k.m. mathews v. k.a. abraham manu/sc/0698/2002manu/sc/0698/2002 : (2002) 6 scc 670.(iv) it was lastly submitted that such kind of prosecutions were totally untenable, misusing and abusing the process of law deterring persons from exercising their fundamental right to freedom of speech guaranteed under article 19(1)(a) of the constitution. it was emphasised that this freedom has to be jealously guarded and protected when it comes to freedom of press. submission was that in the present case, a statement made by justice hegde as the lokayukta of karnataka who called a press conference for the purpose and in that he gave information about the corruption has been made the foundation of the charge of defamation. it is submitted that it is the duty of the newspaper to publish an allegation about which a former supreme court judge made a statement in public as a part of his duty. this was published by several national papers including the hindu, times of india, the indian express reporting the press conference. although the complainant has sweepingly stated that the information disclosed by the lokayukta karnataka is wrong and false and is contemplating legal course of action to seek justice against the false statements made by lokayukta, the sakal publications as a matter of law, and also their public duty as journalists, have a right and obligation to publish the statement and even comment on the same.it was pointed out that the complainant had instituted a civil defamation case against justice hegde wherein he also impleaded the representatives of the hindu, the times of india, deccan herald, new indian express, deccan chronicle, vijaya karnataka, kannad prabha, prajavani, udayvani, sanyukta karnataka. that civil suit itself has been dismissed on 28th june, 2010 as frivolous, with costs, with the observations of the court that it appeared that the plaintiff had filed the said suit in order to gain cheap publicity in an attempt to overcome the serious allegations made in criminal case against him. the learned counsel placed heavy reliance on a recent judgment of this court in subramanian swamy's case wherein there is a copious discussion of the law relating to the freedom of speech and expression enjoyed by the press.12. mr. bhatt, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of complainant stoutly refuted the aforesaid submissions of the appellant. it was submitted that the appellants were trying to trivialize the issue by taking umbrage under the statement which was made by the lokayukta. he argued that the complaint filed by the complainant did not relate to the publication of statement made by the lokayukta. it was submitted that undoubtedly it was the right of the paper to publish the statements, as a news item, which were given by the lokayukta in press conference. according to the learned senior counsel, however, this limit was crossed by the accused persons in publishing the story about the complainant in the newspaper wherein serious libelous and defamatory allegations were made about the integrity of the complainant which included the allegations that the complainant had amassed ill-gotten wealth and richness from silver and elephant teeth smuggling. according to the learned senior counsel, these stories published in the newspaper, which were independent and in addition to the statements made by the lokayukta, damaged the reputation of the complainant thereby lowering his image in the society. the learned counsel further submitted that another offending act on the part of the accused persons which come within the mischief of libel was publication of the editorial under the caption 'police "dog" millionaire'. it was argued that right to freedom of speech or freedom of press for that matter, does not extend to defaming or maligning the reputation of a person by publishing mischievously damaging and frivolous material. if that is done with intent to tarnish the image of the targeted person, it becomes an actionable claim under civil law as well as criminal law.13. adverting to contention of the complainant based on the process issued under section 202 of the code of criminal procedure, it was argued that the magistrate had followed correct and legal process. attention in this behalf was drawn to the following averments made in the complainta) the private limited company sakal papers ltd., is run by the accused no. 1 and 2 and it publishes news paper sakal from various places in maharashtra and karnataka and internet/online edition esakal.b) there is a coordinating office at pune which collects, selects and circulates important news to all the places where from the local editions are published, the local editors include the news circulated by pune coordinating office, known as sakal news service, manned and controlled by the accused nos. 1 and 2 and the important news, particularly the news which invites the risk of legal proceedings, for such a publication are usually brought to the notice of the accused and thereafter they are circulated to different editors.c) the accused have nurtured some grudge against the respondent no. 1 and are interested in defaming the respondent no. 1.d) the accused no. 2 rules the management of sakal news paper in the capacity of chairman of company and the accused no. 1 being the son of accused no. 2 are both interest in increasing the sale of the newspaper, the profits of which, go to sakal papers ltd.e) on 19.3.2009 the sakal news service i.e. "sakal vrutta seva" at its head office situated at pune, transmitted to all the places for publication a news item at page 49 of slp paper book (do we need to write page no. of slp paper book?), indicating that respondent no. 1 had amassed rs. 250 crores illegally, clearly with an intention to defame the respondent no. 1. additional defamatory news were published by sakal print editions and internet/online edition 'esakal", for which respondent no. 1 filed the complaint under sections 500, 501 and 502 r/w 34 indian penal code.14. referring to the above, it was argued that the complainant had given a selective gist of newspaper reports and had also indicated a deliberate design on behalf of the accused persons to defame a senior ips officer. submission was that the learned magistrate had examined the record, and had been so specific stating the order issuing the process and this record contained: (a) all the newspaper reports including internet publication and (b) responses of general public to such news reports. therefore, it could not be said that the learned magistrate had not applied his mind to the relevant material which was documentary in nature and, thus, there was no legal infirmity whatsoever. it was submitted that no doubt amendment of section 202 code of criminal procedure makes it obligatory for the learned magistrate to hold an enquiry into the allegations in the complaint and other relevant materials. however, in the defamation matter, issuance of process after having examination of defamatory material with reaction of the public, would certainly be sufficient to satisfy the test of holding the enquiry under section 202, code of criminal procedure.15. the learned counsel accepted the object of amendment of section 202 code of criminal procedure is stated to be to avoid harassment or unnecessary inconvenience to the innocent persons. however, according to him such alleged harassment is neither a hypothetical situation, nor it is mere legal submission, if the accused person feels harassment by an order of issuance of process then it is expected that he would complain against such unjust harassment without any delay and in any case at the first opportunity. it was so held in rosy and anr. v. state of kerala manu/sc/0018/2000manu/sc/0018/2000 : (2000) 2 scc 230. therefore, the high court was fully justified in rejecting the contention as regards amendment of section 202 code of criminal procedure being an afterthought.16. the learned counsel also referred to the judgment in the case of chandradev singh v. prakash chandra bose manu/sc/0053/1963manu/sc/0053/1963 : air 1963 sc 1430 wherein it was held that the object of inquiry as contemplated in section 202, code of criminal procedure is to ascertain the truth or falsehood. the magistrate making the inquiry has to do this only with reference to the intrinsic quality of the statements made before him and the inquiry which would naturally mean the complaint itself, the statement on oath made by the complainant, and, the statements made before him by persons examined at the instance of the complaint. in the facts of the present case, all the defamatory news articles published in the print editions of sakal and the internet edition esakal were placed before the learned magistrate and based on this material process was issued.17. various judgments were cited in support of the proposition that satisfaction of the magistrate, while issuing the process, is to be confined to the issue as to whether prima facie case is made out against the accused and not sufficient ground for securing his conviction. the learned counsel also argued that a-1 and a-2 had not even raised any contention regarding amended provision of section 202 of code of criminal procedure at any stage earlier and this argument was raised for the first time before the high court.18. mr. bhatt, further submitted that it was also misconceived on the part of the accused persons to argue that they were not responsible for the defamatory and libelous material published in the newspaper thereby refuting the argument predicated on the provisions of the press act. he contended that undoubtedly a person whose name is printed on the copy of the newspaper as an editor, would be responsible since his name is given in the declaration form. however, that does not mean that action cannot be taken against others, more particularly, if they are also responsible for such acts. it was argued that there was specific averments in the complaint that a-1 and a-2 who are chairman and managing director respectively of the newspaper, were not only aware of the impugned publications but the publication was with their active consent. according to the learned counsel the offence was committed when in kolhapur edition the news were published by the local editor who is also impleaded as an accused in the proceedings and also in the internet edition 'esakal'. under section 177 read with section 178, the offence is triable where act is done or consequence ensues. in this case, not only the act is done at kolhapur but the consequence also has followed at kolhapur. the complainant is a permanent resident of kolhapur. what is triable is the offence and not the accused. the accused suffers the sentence or punishment as a result of the trial wherever situated.19. in the instant case even otherwise where there are six accused and four of them have not questioned the process after the criminal revision, the trial could not be segregated by the chief judicial magistrate. in this behalf, it was emphatically argued that sakal papers ltd., is a private limited company, owned and managed by said accused, runs a marathi daily newspaper styled as "sakal", and, an internet edition known as the 'esakal'. the news to all these print editions and internet edition are collected and circulated by a centralised news agency known as the "sakal news service", and, important news inviting consequences are scrutinized and approved by both mr. prataprao pawan and mr. abhijit pawar, who handle and operate the said "sakal news service". it is for this reason that, the internet/online edition 'esakal' and all the print editions have a similar news content and editorials, as the actual editors have virtually no control over the selection of matter and the said accused have in furtherance of their design to defame the complainant, have published the defamatory news through the newspaper controlled by their company sakal papers ltd. the defamatory news items have been published with concurrence of the accused in various editions for a period of over six months to gain profits by selling them and hence the ingredients of sections 500, 501, 502 read with section 34 of the indian penal code are satisfied.20. we have considered the respective submissions of the counsel for the parties. in these proceedings, we are not concerned with the issue as to whether impugned publications make out a case for offence under the aforesaid provisions of the indian penal code? since the learned magistrate has issued the process qua four editors as well, apart from a-1 and a-2, we proceed with the assumption that prima facie case is made out against the said editors. the question is as to whether the learned magistrate adopted correct procedure while issuing notice to a-1 and a-2 as well.21. basic facts which need to be recapitulated for deciding this issue are that a-1 is the managing director of sakal newspapers whereas a-2 is the chairman of the company. further, insofar as declaration under section 7 of the press act is concerned, name of the other accused persons are mentioned except these two accused persons. therefore, we have to examine the matter keeping in view non-existence of such a presumption against these two accused persons. it is also an admitted fact that both the accused persons are not residents of kolhapur and are outside his jurisdiction.having regard to these facts, we proceed to examine the matter in the light of the provisions of section 202, code of criminal procedure as well as section 7 of the press act.22. admitted position in law is that in those cases where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which the magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, it is mandatory on the part of the magistrate to conduct an enquiry or investigation before issuing the process. section 202 of the code of criminal procedure was amended in the year by the code of criminal procedure (amendment) act, 2005, with effect from 22nd june, 2006 by adding the words 'and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction'. there is a vital purpose or objective behind this amendment, namely, to ward off false complaints against such persons residing at a far off places in order to save them from unnecessary harassment. thus, the amended provision casts an obligation on the magistrate to conduct enquiry or direct investigation before issuing the process, so that false complaints are filtered and rejected. the aforesaid purpose is specifically mentioned in the note appended to the bill proposing the said amendment. the essence and purpose of this amendment has been captured by this court in vijay dhanuka v. najima mamtaj (2014) 14 scc 638 in the following words:11. section 202 of the code, inter alia, contemplates postponement of the issue of the process "in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction" and thereafter to either inquire into the case by himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks fit. in the face of it, what needs our determination is as to whether in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which the magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, inquiry is mandatory or not.12. the words "and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction" were inserted by section 19 of the code of criminal procedure (amendment) act (central act 25 of 2005) w.e.f. 23-6-2006. the aforesaid amendment, in the opinion of the legislature, was essential as false complaints are filed against persons residing at far off places in order to harass them. the note for the amendment reads as follows:false complaints are filed against persons residing at far off places simply to harass them. in order to see that innocent persons are not harassed by unscrupulous persons, this clause seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 202 to make it obligatory upon the magistrate that before summoning the accused residing beyond his jurisdiction he shall enquire into the case himself or direct investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks fit, for finding out whether or not there was sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.the use of the expression "shall" prima facie makes the inquiry or the investigation, as the case may be, by the magistrate mandatory. the word "shall" is ordinarily mandatory but sometimes, taking into account the context or the intention, it can be held to be directory. the use of the word "shall" in all circumstances is not decisive. bearing in mind the aforesaid principle, when we look to the intention of the legislature, we find that it is aimed to prevent innocent persons from harassment by unscrupulous persons from false complaints. hence, in our opinion, the use of the expression "shall" and the background and the purpose for which the amendment has been brought, we have no doubt in our mind that inquiry or the investigation, as the case may be, is mandatory before summons are issued against the accused living beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the magistrate.23. for this reason, the amended provision casts an obligation on the magistrate to apply his mind carefully and satisfy himself that the allegations in the complaint, when considered along with the statements recorded or the enquiry conducted thereon, would prima facie constitute the offence for which the complaint is filed. this requirement is emphasised by this court in a recent judgment mehmood ul rehman v. khazir mohammad tunda (2016) 1 scc (cri.) 124 in the following words:20. the extensive reference to the case law would clearly show that cognizance of an offence on complaint is taken for the purpose of issuing process to the accused. since it is a process of taking judicial notice of certain facts which constitute an offence, there has to be application of mind as to whether the allegations in the complaint, when considered along with the statements recorded or the inquiry conducted thereon, would constitute violation of law so as to call a person to appear before the criminal court. it is not a mechanical process or matter of course. as held by this court in pepsi foods ltd.. [pepsi foods ltd. v. judicial magistrate, manu/sc/1090/1998manu/sc/1090/1998 : (1998) 5 scc 749: 1998 scc (cri.) 1400] to set in motion the process of criminal law against a person is a serious matter.22. the steps taken by the magistrate under section 190(1)(a) code of criminal procedure followed by section 204 code of criminal procedure should reflect that the magistrate has applied his mind to the facts and the statements and he is satisfied that there is ground for proceeding further in the matter by asking the person against whom the violation of law is alleged, to appear before the court. the satisfaction on the ground for proceeding would mean that the facts alleged in the complaint would constitute an offence, and when considered along with the statements recorded, would, prima facie, make the accused answerable before the court. no doubt, no formal order or a speaking order is required to be passed at that stage. the code of criminal procedure requires speaking order to be passed under section 203 code of criminal procedure when the complaint is dismissed and that too the reasons need to be stated only briefly. in other words, the magistrate is not to act as a post office in taking cognizance of each and every complaint filed before him and issue process as a matter of course. there must be sufficient indication in the order passed by the magistrate that he is satisfied that the allegations in the complaint constitute an offence and when considered along with the statements recorded and the result of inquiry or report of investigation under section 202 code of criminal procedure, if any, the accused is answerable before the criminal court, there is ground for proceeding against the accused under section 204 code of criminal procedure, by issuing process for appearance. the application of mind is best demonstrated by disclosure of mind on the satisfaction. if there is no such indication in a case where the magistrate proceeds under sections 190/204 code of criminal procedure, the high court under section 482 code of criminal procedure is bound to invoke its inherent power in order to prevent abuse of the power of the criminal court. to be called to appear before the criminal court as an accused is serious matter affecting one's dignity, self-respect and image in society. hence, the process of criminal court shall not be made a weapon of harassment.24. the requirement of conducting enquiry or directing investigation before issuing process is, therefore, not an empty formality. what kind of 'enquiry' is needed under this provision has also been explained in vijay dhanuka (2014) 14 scc 638 case, which is reproduced hereunder:14. in view of our answer to the aforesaid question, the next question which falls for our determination is whether the learned magistrate before issuing summons has held the inquiry as mandated under section 202 of the code. the word "inquiry" has been defined under section 2(g) of the code, the same reads as follows:2. (g) 'inquiry' means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this code by a magistrate or court;it is evident from the aforesaid provision, every inquiry other than a trial conducted by the magistrate or the court is an inquiry. no specific mode or manner of inquiry is provided under section 202 of the code. in the inquiry envisaged under section 202 of the code, the witnesses are examined whereas under section 200 of the code, examination of the complainant only is necessary with the option of examining the witnesses present, if any. this exercise by the magistrate, for the purpose of deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, is nothing but an inquiry envisaged under section 202 of the code.25. when we peruse the summoning order, we find that it does not reflected any such inquiry. no doubt, the order mentioned that the learned magistrate had passed the same after reading the complaint, verification statement of complainant and after perusing the copies of documents filed on record, i.e., fir translation of complaint, affidavit of advocate who had translated the fir into english etc. the operative portion reads as under:on considering facts on record, it appears that complainant has made out prima facie case against the accused for, the offences punishable under sections 500, 501, 50 (sic 500) read with 34 of the indian penal code. hence issue process against the accused for the above offences returnable on 23.12.2009. case be registered as summary case.26. insofar as, these two accused persons are concerned there is no enquiry of the nature enumerated in section 202, code of criminal procedure.27. the learned magistrate did not look into the matter keeping in view the provisions of section 7 of the press act and applying his mind whether there is any declaration qua these two persons under the said act and, if not, on what basis they are to be proceeded with along with the editors. application of mind on this aspect was necessary. it is made clear that this court is not suggesting that these two accused persons cannot be proceeded with at all only because of absence of their names in the declaration under press act. what is emphasised is that there is no presumption against these persons under section 7 of the press act and they being outside the territorial jurisdiction of the concerned magistrate, the magistrate was required to apply his mind on these aspects while passing summoning orders qua a-1 and a-2.28. no doubt, the argument predicated on section 202 of the code of criminal procedure was raised for the first time by a-1 before the high court. notwithstanding the same, being a pure legal issue which could be tested on the basis of admitted facts on record, the high court could have considered this argument on merits. it is a settled proposition of law that a pure legal issue can be raised at any stage of proceedings, more so, when it goes to the jurisdiction of the matter (see: national textile corpn. ltd., v. nareshkumar badrikumar jagad; [manu/sc/1028/2011manu/sc/1028/2011 : (2011) 12 scc 695].29. we may like to record that though mr. bhatt had refuted the arguments founded on section 202 of code of criminal procedure, even he had submitted that in case this court is satisfied that mandatory requirement of section 202 is not fulfilled by the learned magistrate before issuing the process, this court can direct the magistrate to do so, mr. bhatt, for this purpose, referred to the judgment in the case of the national bank of oman manu/sc/1123/2012manu/sc/1123/2012 : (2013) 2 scc 488.30. for the aforesaid reasons, criminal appeal arising out of slp (crl) no. 9318 of 2012 is allowed thereby quashing the notice dated 24th november, 2009 in respect of a-1 with direction to the learned magistrate to take up the matter afresh qua a-1 and pass necessary orders as are permissible in law, after following the procedure contained in section 202, code of criminal procedure.31. insofar as appeal filed by the complainant discharging a-2 is concerned, the high court has quashed the notice on the ground that he is only shown as chairman and is not shown to be actually associated with the publication of the newspaper. since, we are relegating the matter insofar as a-1 is concerned, for the same reasons the complainant needs to be given an opportunity to show as to whether a-2 was actually associated with the publication or not. it is more so when we find that high court has not given any cogent reasons on the basis of which it has said that chairman is not shown to be associated with the impugned publication. thus, we allow the second appeal as well and direct the learned magistrate to hold the same inquiry as directed qua a-1 and apply his mind as to whether notice against a-1 and a-2 needs to be issued or not.32. no orders as to costs.1 crl. misc. no. 30154/2010; dtd. 22.12.2011 by punjab and haryana high court at chandigarh
1. short question that arises for consideration in this appeal requires interpretation of section 32(1b) which was inserted by amending act 49/69 in bombay tenancy and agricultural lands act, 1948 (for short 'the act'). the aforesaid question arises in the context of dispossession of the appellant who was a tenant of land in dispute. it is not disputed that the appellant was a tenant in respect of suit land since 1948-49. in the year 1956, the appellant lost possession of the disputed land otherwise than the procedure prescribed under the act. it is alleged that on 6.1.1967, the respondent-landlord mortgaged the land to one bajrang maruti kanse. in the year 1969, maharashtra state legislature amended the act by amending act 49 of 69 whereby section 32(1b) was inserted in the act. thereafter, in view of the insertion of section 32(1b) in the act, the tahsildar in the year 1971 started suo motu proceedings for restoration of possession of land to the appellant. however, on 1.3.1972 the tahsildar dropped the proceedings holding that the landlord was not in possession of land on 31.7.1969. although, the tahsildar held that appellant was in possession of the land on 15.6.1955. the appellant preferred an appeal before the sub-divisional officer which was allowed and the case was remanded back to the tahsildar. on remand, the tahsildar again dropped the proceedings. aggrieved the appellant preferred an appeal before the sub divisional officer who by order dated 16.11.1987 allowed the appeal and directed restoration of possession to the appellant. the respondent-landlord thereafter preferred a revision petition before the maharashtra revenue tribunal, pune (for short 'the tribunal'). the tribunal by its order dated 15.6.1988 allowed the revision application and the order of the sub divisional officer was set aside. the appellant thereafter preferred a petition under article 227 of the constitution before the bombay high court. the bombay high court in view of the judgment of this court in dhondiram tatoba kadam v. ramchandra balwantrao dubal (since deceased) by his lrs and anr. manu/sc/0681/1994manu/sc/0681/1994 : (1994)3scc366 dismissed the writ petition observing thus:-"however, considering the fact that the apex court in the case of ramchandra keshav adke (supra) has held that surrender of tenancy which does not comply with the requirement of the provisions of the act is non est and considering the judgment of the apex court in the case of bhagwant pundlik, etc., where on the strength of a similar language of the bombay tenancy & agricultural lands (vidarbha region) act, a bench of three judges had negatived a similar contention in the matter of interpretation of section 36 that such injunction should be restricted to only those cases of fraud, coercion and misrepresentation, this would be a fit and proper case where special leave should be granted to the petitioners."2. however, high court granted a certificate holding that it was a fit case for appeal to supreme court. it is in this manner, the matter has come up before us.3. it is not disputed that the predecessors of the appellant were tenant on the relevant date. it is also not disputed that the respondent herein is the landlord of the land in question. it is further not disputed that the appellant herein voluntarily surrendered the land to the landlord. it also stands admitted that the aforesaid surrender was not in terms of sections 15 and 29 of the act. the question which, therefore, arises for our consideration is whether the voluntary surrender which is not in terms of sections 15 and 29 is a valid one.4. the relationship of the landlord and tenant is governed by the provisions of the said act. section 15 provides for termination of tenancy by surrendering thereof which reads thus:"15(1) a tenant may terminate the tenancy in respect of any land at at any time by surrendering his interest therein in favour of the landlord:provided that such surrender shall be in writing and verified before the mamlatdar in the prescribed manner.(2) where a tenant surrenders his tenancy, the landlord shall be entitled to retain the land so surrendered for the like purposes, and to the like extent, and in so far as the conditions are applicable subject to the like conditions as are provided in sections 31 and 31a for the termination of tenancies.(2a) the mamlatdar shall in respect of the surrender verified under sub-section (1), hold an inquiry and decide whether the landlord is entitled under sub-section (2) to retain the whole or any portion of the land so surrendered, and specify the extent and particulars in that behalf.(3) the land or any portion thereof, which the landlord is not entitled to retain under sub-section (2), shall be liable to be disposed of in the manner provided under clause (o) of sub-section (2) of section 32 p."5. section 29 provides for procedure of taking possession which is as under:-"29 (1) a tenant or an agricultural labourer or artisan entitled to possession of any land or dwelling house under any of the provisions of this act may apply in writing for such possession to the mamlatdar. the application shall be made in such form as may be prescribed and within a period of two years from the date on which the right to obtain possession of the land or dwelling house is deemed to have accrued to the tenant, agricultural labourer or artisan, as the case may be.(2) save as otherwise provided in sub-section (3a), no landlord shall obtain possession of any land or dwelling house held by a tenant except under an order of the mamlatdar. for obtaining such order be shall make an application in the prescribed form and within a period of two years from the date on which the right to obtain possession of the land or dwelling house, as the case may be, is deemed to have accrued to him.(3) on receipt of application under sub-section (1) or (2), the mamlatdar shall, after holding an inquiry, pass such order thereon as he deems fit:provided that where an application under sub-section (2) is made by a landlord in pursuance of the right conferred on him under section 31, the mamlatdar shall first decide, as preliminary issues, whether the conditions specified in clauses (c) and (d) of section 31a and sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 31b are satisfied. if the mamlatdar finds that any of the said conditions is not satisfied, he shall reject the application forthwith.(3a) where a landlord proceeds for termination of the tenancy under sub-section (1) of section 40(1b), then, notwithstanding anything contained in this act, the application for possession of the land shall be made to the collector, who shall, after holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner, pass such order thereon as be deems fit.(4) any person taking possession of any land or dwelling house except in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), (2) or as the case may be, (3a), shall be liable to forfeiture of crops, if any, grown in the land in addition to payment of costs as may be directed by the mamlatdar or by the collector and also to the penalty prescribed in section 81."6. the said act, therefore, contemplates termination of tenancy by surrender thereof; and consequent liking over possession by the landlord. how such termination of tenancy could take place is provided for in section 15 of the act in terms whereof inter-alia a surrender of the tenancy becomes a legal one only when such surrender is in writing and verified before the mamlatdar in the prescribed manner. for the said purpose the mamlatdar is also required to hold an enquiry. it is not in dispute that purported surrender made by the predecessor-in-interest in favour of the respondents herein was although considered to be voluntary but the same did not satisfy the very legal requirement, contained in section 15 of the act.7. section 29 of the act, as noticed hereinbefore, postulates taking over of possession by the landlord from the tenant only in accordance with procedure prescribed therefore. in the event, the surrender made by the predecessor-in-interest of the appellant in favour of the respondent is found to be invalid; the possession thereof obtained by the later pursuant to or in furtherance thereof shall also be invalid. in such an event, although the landlord takes a physical possession of the land, the right to possess the same remains with the tenant. he could recover possession of the said land in accordance with law. the said act is a beneficent statute. it should be construed in favour of the tenant and against the landlord. the protection given to the tenant in terms of the said act must be given full effect. so construed, the expression 'possession' would also include right of possession. the view which we have taken is fortified by the decisions of this court in ramchandra keshav adke (dead) by lrs and ors. v. govind joti chavare and ors. manu/sc/0511/1975manu/sc/0511/1975 : [1975]3scr839 , bhagwant pundalik and anr. v. kishan ganpat bharaskal and ors. manu/sc/0509/1970manu/sc/0509/1970 : [1971]2scr657 and in abdul ajij shaikh jumma and anr. v. dashrath indas nhavi and ors. air 1987 sc 1626 and this the consistent view had been that the surrender by the tenant for being legal must be in conformity with the provisions contained in sections 15 and 29 of the act.8. in ram chandra keshav adke (supra) the question arose for consideration was whether the alleged surrender by the tenant was valid. this court after interpreting section 5(3)(b) and rule 2-a was of the view that the amendment was brought with a view to protection the tenant on two fronts against two types of danger -- one against possible coercion, undue influence and trickery proceedings from the landlord and other against the tenant's own ignorance, improvidence and attitude of helpless self-resignation stemming from his weaker position in the tenant-landlord relationship and, therefore, sections 15 and 29 are mandatory in nature and any departure from this would make the surrender invalid. it was also held that the imperative language, the beneficent purpose and importance of these provisions for efficacious implementation of the general scheme of the act, -- all unerringly lead to the conclusion that they were intended to be mandatory. neglect of any of these statutory requisites would be fatal. disobedience of even one of these mandates would render the surrender invalid and ineffectual and the consequence of the violation of the mandatory provisions namely sections 15 and 29 would be that the surrender would be rendered non-est for the purpose of section 5(3)(b) and rule 2-a.9. in bhagwant pundalik's case (supra) this court considered the analogous provisions of the bombay tenancy and agricultural lands (vidarbha region) act, 1958 and held that the provisions are mandatory in nature and any violation of the act would render the surrender invalid.10. in abdul ajij's case (supra) this court while interpreting sections 15 and 29(2) of the act held that the provisions are mandatory in nature and any violation of the said provisions would render the surrender invalid.11. section 32(1b) which was brought in by the amendment in the year 1969 reads thus:"where a tenant who was in possession on the appointed day and who, on account of his being dispossessed before the 1st day of april, 1957 otherwise than in the manner and by an order of the tahsildar as provided in section 29, is not in possession of the land on the said date and the land is in the possession of the landlord or his successor-in-interest on the 31st day of july, 1969 and the land is not put to a non-agricultural use on or before the last mentioned date, then, the tahsildar shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the said section 29, either suo motu or on the application of the tenant, hold an inquiry and direct that such land shall be taken from the possession of the landlord or, as the case may be, his successor-in-interest, and shall be restored to the tenant; and thereafter, the provisions of this section and sections 32a to 32r (both inclusive) shall, insofar as they may be applicable, apply thereto, subject to the, modification that the tenant shall be deemed to have purchased the land on the date on which the land is restored to him;provided that the tenant shall be entitled to restoration of the land under this sub-section only if he undertakes to cultivate the land personally and of so much thereof as together with the other land held by him as owner of tenant shall not exceed the ceiling area."12. the salient features of section 32(1b) of the act are (1) that the tenant must be in possession of land on 15.6.1955 and (2) the tenant was evicted otherwise than by an order of the mamlatdar before 1.4.1957 and (3) the landlord or his successor-in-interest which includes persons who acquire interest by testamentary disposition or devolution on death must be in possession as on 31.7.1969 and (4) the land is not put to a non-agricultural use before 31.7.1969.in the case of dhondiram totoba kadam (supra), however, a somewhat contrary view was taken by this court while interpreting the said proviso. this decision was rendered by a bench of three judges and one of them disagreed with the majority judgment. the majority held that any voluntary surrender would be a valid surrender. it was held that voluntary giving up of possession would not amount to dispossession unless the law provides for it and the provisions should be construed liberally. it may be pointed out that this court while holding so, only considered the provisions of section 32(1-b) of the act and did not refer to sections 15 and 29(2) of the act which mandated its compliance for a valid surrender.13. the learned judges although touched upon the question as regards obtaining legal possession, unfortunately failed to notice the mandatory provisions of sections 15 & 29 of the act. once it is held that the provisions of sections 15 & 29 are mandatory, it goes without saying that possession obtained by the landlord in violation of such mandatory provisions would be illegal. a statue, as is well known, must be read in its entirety. the expression "dispossession" having regard to the text and context of the act cannot be given its natural meaning. the high court arrived at a finding of fact that the appellant herein had satisfied all the requirements as contained in section 32(1b) of the act. the high court, however, relying on or on the basis of the decision of this court in dhondiram totoba kadam (supra), dismissed the appeal of the appellant. the high court, as noticed hereinbefore, however, felt that the question raised is of great general importance.14. having given our anxious thought, we are of the opinion that for the reasons stated hereinbefore, the decision of this court in dhondiram totoba kadam (supra), having not noticed the earlier binding precedent of the co-ordinate bench and having not considered the mandatory provisions as contained in sections 15 & 29 of the act had been rendered per incuriam. it, therefore, does not constitute a binding precedent.15. in halsbury laws of england, 4th edition volume 26 it is stated:"a decision is given per incuriam when the court has acted in ignorance of a previous decision of its own or of a court of coordinate jurisdiction which covered the case before it, in which case it must decide which case to follow or when it has acted in ignorance of a house of lords decisions, in which case it must follow that decision; or when the decision is given in ignorance of the terms of a statute or rule having statutory force."in state of u.p. and anr. v. synthetics and chemicals ltd. and anr. reported in manu/sc/0616/1991manu/sc/0616/1991 : 1993(41)ecc326 , this court observed:"in curia" literally means 'carelessness'. in practice per incuriam appeared to mean per ignoratium. english courts have developed this principle in relaxation of the rule of stare decisis. the 'quotable in law' is avoided and ignored if it is rendered, 'in ignoratium of a statute or other binding authority'. (young v. bristol aeroplane co. ltd.) same has been accepted approved and adopted by this court while interpreting article 141 of the constitution which embodies the doctrine of precedents as a matter of law."16. in govt. of andhra pradesh and anr. v. b. satyanarayana rao (dead) by lrs. manu/sc/0275/2000manu/sc/0275/2000 : (2000)iillj545sc , it has been held as follows:"rule of per incuriam can be applied where a court omits to consider a binding precedent of the same court or the superior court rendered on the same issue or where a court omits to consider any statute while deciding that issue."17. furthermore, this court, while rendering judgment in dhondiram totoba kadam (supra), was bound by its earlier decision of co-ordinate bench in ramchandra keshav adke (supra). we are bound to follow the earlier judgment which is precisely on the point in preference to the later judgment which has been rendered without adequate argument at the bar and also without reference to the mandatory provisions of the act.18. learned counsel appearing for the respondent then urged that the tribunal has recorded a finding of fact that the landlord has transferred the land to the purchaser and, thus, he being no longer in possession, no benefit order could be passed in favour of the appellant.19. the contention of the respondent was that he has executed an agreement for sale in the year 1967 with one bajrang maruti kanse and, therefore, the landlord is not in possession. it is no doubt true that the tribunal recorded a finding that the purchaser was in possession. surprisingly, however, on perusal of the relevant documents, we find that the case set up by the respondent that he has executed an agreement for sale was not correct. in fact it was a mortgage with the right of re-conveyance and as such it was not an agreement for sale. thus, the mortgagee was in possession of the land on behalf of the landlord because no title or interest was passed on in favour of the mortgagee, in so far as no registered document was executed transferring the interest in the land by the landlord in favour of the mortgagee.20. in absence of any registered document having regard to the provisions contained in sections 17 and 49 of the registration act, no lawful title could pass on to the mortgagee. lawful title as well as the legal possession of the land in question therefore remained with the landlord. the so-called mortgagee in the aforementioned circumstances must be held to have merely in permissive possession of the land. such a possession, on the part of the so-called mortgagee, being not in his own right, the land could have been restored in favour of the appellant. the appellate authority correctly analysed the legal position. it is true that the tribunal while reversing the judgment and order of the appellate authority came to a finding that a third party was in possession but such purported finding of fact has been arrived at on applying wrong legal tests and without taking into consideration the effect of the provisions of the transfer of property act and also the indian registration act. in that view of the matter, the finding of the tribunal was not sustainable. it is only in that premise the high court arrived at a finding that the appellant has satisfied all conditions laid down under section 32(1b) of the act.21. in view of our findings that the decision in dhondiram totoba kadam (supra) had been rendered per incuriam and did not create a binding precedent, the judgment of the high court having been rested solely thereon cannot be sustained. it is set aside accordingly. for the aforementioned reasons, the appeal deserves to be allowed. the appeal is allowed accordingly, judgment under challenge is set aside. there shall be no order as to costs.
kurian joseph, j.1. leave granted.2. the issue raised in this appeal pertains to disputes on partition. the learned counsel for the parties submit that during the pendency of the matter before this court, the disputes have been settled out of the court amicably. thanks to the cooperation extended by the parties and the learned counsel appearing for the parties, it is heartening to note that the parties have arrived at an amicable settlement. the memorandum of compromise has been signed by the parties/legal representatives and the same has been produced in i.a. no. 6 of 2016 in slp (c) no. 30966/2009 which has been converted to an appeal.3. the appeal is disposed of in terms of the memorandum of compromise dated 27.04.2016 which will form part of the decree.no costs.
s.b. sinha, j.1. whether non-publication of a final electoral roll would render a general election invalid in law is the core question involved in this appeal filed by the appellant herein under section 116a of the representation of the people-act. 1951 (hereinafter referred to as 'the 1951 act') which arises out of a judgment and order of the high court of kerala dated 7.3.2002 passed in e.p. no. 8 of 2001 whereby and whereunder his election petition was dismissed.background fact.:2. the election in question was held for kozhikode ii legislative assembly constituency on 10.05.2001. the first, second, third and fourth respondents herein contested the said election. the appellant herein was the election agent of the second respondent. the said election petition came to be filed in the following circumstances:3. a preliminary electoral roll (mother roll) was published in 1999 which was revised on 1.1.2000 and 1.1.2001 purported to be in terms of continuous and special revision scheme. one revision was carried out between 15.3.2001 and 18.3.2001 and another between 21.4.2001 and 23.4.2001. the final electoral roll was published on 23.4.2001. despite the fact that the last date of acceptance of nomination was 3 p.m., allegedly, the final electoral roll was published at 8 p.m. on 23.4.2001. the electoral roll consisted of 1,52,225 voters out of which 1,05,137 voters exercised their franchise. the result of the election was declared on 13.5.2001. the first respondent was declared elected having secured 48,886 votes whereas the second respondent secured 48.099 votes. the third and fourth respondents herein obtained 7.345 and 1,107 votes respectively. the winning margin was, thus, only 787 votes.4. in the election petition, the appellant herein alleged that after 3 p.m. on 23.4.2001. names of 19,045 voters were deleted from the voters list; whereas 6,828 new names were added therein. the fact which, however, stands admitted is that in the 2001 revision, names of 18,839 voters were deleted whereas names of 7,003 voters were added.5. the appellant herein in the election petition further alleged that the electoral roll as it stood at 3 p.m. on 23.4.2001 which had been published prior thereto became final on the expiry of the time fixed for acceptance of nominations for election and, thus, the deletion of names of 19,045 voters from the said roll without issuance of any notice was bad in law, as thereby the genuine voters who turned up at the polling stations had been turned away. allegedly the majority of such persons were known supporters of the left democratic front whose candidate was the second respondent. it was also furthermore contended that the names of 6,828 persons were illegally added after the publication of the final electoral roll on the said date; the majority of whom voted in support of the united democratic front to which the first respondent herein belonged to. according to the appellant, the said electoral roll in view of the prohibition contained in section 23(3) of the representation of the people act, 1950 (for short, 'the 1950 act') was void ab initio, as a result whereof the election of the first respondent became vitiated by reason of improper refusal of votes of 9,500 persons and improper reception of votes of 4.500 persons, which being void could not have been taken into consideration for the purpose of the result of the election.issues.6. having regard the pleadings of the parties the learned tribunal framed the following issues:"(1) has the petitioner adequate cause of action to challenge the declaration of results made on 13.5.2001?(2) whether the e.p is liable to be dismissed for non-joinder of necessary parties?(3) whether the e.p. is liable to be rejected/dismissed for want of adequate pleadings?(4) whether the names of 19045 voters were deleted from the final electoral roll after 23.4.2001 without notice to them and in violation of law?(5) whether the refusal of voting right to the 19045 voters has materially affected the result of the election?(6) whether the additional list of 6828 voters were added to the final electoral roll after 30.4.2001?(7) whether many of the said 6828 ineligible voters have voted for the 1st respondent affecting the declaration of results?"(8) relief and costs?"findings of the high court:7. the preliminary issues were decided in favour of the appellant by an order dated 24.10.2001. the said order is not in question in this appeal.8. the tribunal dismissed the election petition holding: (1) although irregularities had been committed in preparation and publication of the electoral roll, as the appellant herein had not been able to prove that the legal requirement contained in section 100(1)(d) of the 1951 act was fulfilled, the election of the first respondent cannot be set aside: (2) p.w.1 and p.w.2 who were examined on behalf of the appellant herein to show that their names were not included despite request were not relied upon on the ground that they had made the said request after 23.4.2001 and as such their request had rightly been denied; (3) the appellant did not produce an authenticated copy of the electoral roll in full form to find out the alterations which according to the appellant, were made subsequent to 3 p.m. nor produced any such altered roll; (4) copies of the final electoral roll (fer) being ext. p1 and ext. p2 filed in the proceedings being not certified ones, the same were inadmissible in evidence; (5) the appellant admitted that he had no knowledge about the precise date on which the final electoral roll was published: (6) a copy of the final electoral roll having not been filed, no finding can be arrived at for determination as to whether there had been any subsequent addition or deletion; (7) no clinching evidence had been adduced to show that there had actually been an addition of 787 voters or more after 3 p.m. or deletion of that number of votes thereafter; (8) no voter had come forward with a case that his right to vote was denied, although the same is a constitutional right under article 326 of the constitution of india; (9) although the election officer who examined himself as p.w. 1 had not acted with responsibility, the same did not have any direct effect in the outcome of the result; (10) though irregularities had been committed in the matter of preparation of electoral roll but the same were insufficient in upset the result of the election.9. it. was observed:"... all these indicate that even after the last date, let alone the last hour for filing nominations, p.w. 1 might have entertained some applications for additions and effected deletions as well based on reports of anganwadi teachers received at the 13th hour. in fact, the petitioner has created a strong suspicion whether there was, in actual fact, any publication of the final roll as claimed by him in his notice board at all. the files produced by him do not contain the office copy of any notice published by him announcing publication of the final electoral roll whether it was published at 8 p.m. on the 23rd or thereafter."submissions:10. the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, submitted that in the instant case, there has been a flagrant violation of section 23(3) of the 1950 act. the learned counsel would further contend that as the provision contained in sub-section (3) of section 23 of the 1950 act is mandatory in nature, the violation thereof rendered the election void. he would urge that the election held pursuant to or in furtherance of the electoral roll prepared and published after 23.4.2001 at 8. p.m. must be held to be wholly illegal rendering the election void ab initio. according to the learned counsel, the high court misdirected itself in passing the impugned judgment insofar as it failed to take into consideration that the electoral roll could not have been published at 8 p.m. on 23.4.2001. the learned counsel took us through the evidences of p.w.1, p.w. 2, p.w. 6, p.w. 8 and some other witnesses for the purpose of showing that the entire proceeding was wholly illegal and, thus, the election in its entirety should be set aside. the learned counsel would contend that the high court should have exercised its suo motu power of directing recounting of votes so as to exclude the illegal ones, having regard to section 62 of the 1951 act.11. reliance in support of the aforementioned contentions has been placed by the learned counsel for the appellant on baidyanath panjira v. sita rain mahto and ors. manu/sc/0255/1969manu/sc/0255/1969 : [1970]1scr839 , baidyanath panjiar v. sita ram mahto and ors. manu/sc/0255/1969manu/sc/0255/1969 : [1970]1scr839 , narendra madivalapa kheni v. manikrao patil and ors. manu/sc/0210/1977manu/sc/0210/1977 : [1978]1scr193 , ramji prasad singh v. ram bilas jha and ors. manu/sc/0282/1976manu/sc/0282/1976 : [1977]1scr741 , bashir ahmad magrey v. ghulam quadir mir and ors. manu/sc/0270/1976manu/sc/0270/1976 : [1977]2scr297 , i. vikheshe sema v. hokishe sema manu/sc/1164/1996manu/sc/1164/1996 : air1996sc1842 , d.b. raju v. h.j. kantharaj and ors. manu/sc/0494/1990manu/sc/0494/1990 : 1974crilj611 , lal babu hussein and ors. etc. v. electoral registration officer and ors. etc. manu/sc/0645/1995manu/sc/0645/1995 : [1997]225itr561(sc) , the chief commissioner of ajmer and anr. v. radhey shaya dani manu/sc/0054/1956manu/sc/0054/1956 : [1957]1scr68 and hafiz mohammad anwar khan and anr. v. state of madhya pradesh and ors. manu/mp/0079/1967manu/mp/0079/1967 : air1967mp257 ,12. mr. k.k. venugopal, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the first respondent, on the other hand, would submit that admittedly continuous and special revisions were carried out since 1999, the last one during the period 21.4.2001 and 23.4.2001. according to the learned counsel, a revision of electoral roll was also carried on between 15.3.2001 and 18.3.2001 and in that situation it was incumbent upon the appellant herein to plead and prove that in between 3 p.m. and 8 p.m. on 23.4.2001, names of how many persons were added or names of how many persons were deleted therefrom.13. the leaned counsel would contend that it has not and could not have been the case of the appellant herein that names of 7,003 voters were added and names of 18,839 voters were deleted after 3 p.m. on 23.4.2001, as admittedly the mother roll could be revised upto 3 p.m. on 23.4.2001.14. mr. venugopal would urge that in law it is not necessary to make publication of the electoral roll in terms of sub-section (3) of section 23 of the 1950 act by 3 p.m. of the date fixed for filing nomination inasmuch as the said provision contemplates mere issuance of directions by the specified authorities. while issuing such directions, the statutory authorities are required to assign reasons, as the said order would be appealable ones. the learned counsel would contend that having regard to the provision of section 100(1)(d) of the 1951 act despite preparation of irregular electoral roll, it is necessary to plead and prove that by reason thereof, the result of the election had been materially affected. strong reliance in this regard has been placed on g.k. samal v. r.n. rao and ors. 11972 (44) elr 25.15. the learned counsel in support of his aforementioned contentions also relied on vashit narain sharma v. dev chandra and ors. manu/sc/0101/1954manu/sc/0101/1954 : [1955]1scr509 , paokai haokip v. rishang and ors. manu/sc/0405/1968manu/sc/0405/1968 : [1969]1scr637 , shiv charan singh v. chandra bhan singh and ors. manu/sc/0439/1988manu/sc/0439/1988 : [1988]2scr713 , j. chandra sekhara rao v. v. jagapathi rao and ors. manu/sc/0670/1993manu/sc/0670/1993, uma ballav rath (smt.) v. maheshwar mohanty (smt.) and ors. manu/sc/0146/1999manu/sc/0146/1999 : [1999]1scr895 , tek chand v. dile ram manu/sc/0048/2001manu/sc/0048/2001 : [2001]1scr527 and santosh yadav v. narender singh manu/sc/0688/2001manu/sc/0688/2001 : air2002sc241 .16. mr. venugopal in his usual fairness has drawn our attention to a decision of three-judge bench of this court in chhedi ram v. jhilmit ram and ors. [(1984) 2 scc 2811 wherein this court had set, aside the election, having regard to margin of 373 votes vis-a-vis wasted votes being 6,110 (the difference being 20 times). however, it was pointed out that the said decision was held to have been rendered in the peculiar fact situation of that case.questions:1) whether addition or deletion of names after the last date fixed for filing of nominations would invalidate the entire election?2) whether an election petitioner must plead and prove as to how far and to what extent such illegal addition or deletion of the names of voters had materially affected the election?statutory provisions:17. before embarking upon the questions referred to hereinbefore, we may look to some statutory provisions.18. the 1950 act was enacted to provide allocation of scats in and the delimitation of constituencies for the purpose of election to the house of the people and the legislatures of states, the qualifications of voters at such elections, the preparation of electoral rolls, the manner of filling seats in the council of slates to be filled by representatives of union territories and matters connected therewith.19. section 2(b) provides as under:"assembly constituency" means a constituency provided by law for the purpose of elections to the legislative assembly of a state;20. section 21 reads as under:"21. preparation and revision of electoral rolls. (1) the electoral roll for each constituency shall be prepared in the prescribed manner by reference to the qualifying date and shall come into force immediately upon its final publication in accordance with the rules made under this act.(2) the said electoral roll-(a) shall, unless otherwise directed by the election commission for reasons to be recorded in writing, be revised in the prescribed manner by reference to the qualifying date-(i) before each general election to the house of people or to the legislative assembly of a state; and(ii) before each bye-election to fill a casual vacancy in a seat allotted to the constituency; and(b) shall he revised in any year in the prescribed manner by reference to the qualifying date if such revision has been directed by election commission:provided that if the electoral roll is not revised as aforesaid, the validity or continued operation of the said electoral roll shall not thereby be affected.(3) notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the election commission may at any time, for reasons to be recorded, direct a special revision of the electoral roll for any constituency or part of a constituency in such manner as it may think fit:provided that subject to the other provisions of this act, the electoral roll for the constituency, as in force at the time of the issue of any such direction, shall continue to be in force until the completion of the special revision so directed."21. section 22 provides as under:"22. correction of entries in electoral rolls.- if the electoral registration officer for a constituency, on application made to him or on his own motion, is satisfied after such inquiry as he thinks fit, that any entry in the electoral roll of the constituency-(a) is erroneous or defective in any particular.(b) should be transposed to another place in the roll on the ground that the person concerned has changed his place of ordinary residence within the constituency, or(c) should be detected on the ground that the person concerned is dead or has ceased to he ordinarily resident in the constituency or is otherwise not entitled to be registered in that roll,the electoral registration officer shall, subject to such general or special direction, if any, as may be given by the election commission in this behalf, amend, transpose or delete the entry; provided that before taking any action on any ground under clause (a) or clause (b) or any action under clause (c) on the ground that the person concerned has ceased to be ordinarily resident in the constituency or that he is otherwise not entitled to be registered in the electoral roll of that constituency, the electoral registration officer shall give the person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the action proposed to be taken in relation to him."22. section 23 provides as under:"23. inclusion of names in electoral rolls.- (1) any person whose name is not included in the electoral roll of a constituency may apply to the electoral registration officer for the inclusion of his name in that roll.(2) the electoral registration officer shall, if satisfied that the applicant is entitled to be registered in the electoral roll, direct his name to be included therein:provided that if the applicant is registered in the electoral mil of any other constituency, the electoral registration officer shall inform the electoral registration officer of that other constituency and that officer shall, on receipt of the information, strike off the applicant's name from that roll.(3) no amendment, transposition or deletion of any entry shall be made under section 22 and no direction for the inclusion of a name in the electoral roll of a constituency shall be given under this section, after the last date for making nominations for an election in that constituency or in the parliamentary constituency within which that constituency is comprised and before the completion of that election."23. the 1951 act was enacted to provide for the conduct of elections to the houses of parliament and to the house or houses of the legislature of each state, the qualifications and disqualifications for membership of those houses, the corrupt practices and other offences at or in connection with such elections and the decision of doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with such elections.24. section 2(d) defines 'election' in the following terms;"2(d) "election" means an election to fill a seat or seats in either house of parliament or in the house or either house of the legislature of a state other than the state of jammu and kashmir."25. section 2(e) reads as under:"2(e) "elector" in relation to a constituency means a person whose name is entered in the electoral roll of that constituency for the time being in force and who is not subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 16 of the representation of the people act, 1950 (43 of 1950);"26. sub-section (1) of section 33 provides as under:"33. presentation of nomination paper and requirements for a valid nomination.(1) on or before the date appointed under clause (a) of section 30 each candidate shall, either in person or by his proposer, between the hours of eleven o' clock in the forenoon and three o' clock in the afternoon deliver to the returning officer at the place specified in this behalf in the notice issued under section 31 a nomination paper completed in the prescribed form and signed by the candidate and by an elector of the constituency as proposer"27. section 62 reads as under:"62. right to vote.- (1) no person who is not, and except as expressly provided by the act, every person who is, for the time being entered in the electoral roll of any constituency shall be entitled to vote in that constituency.(2) no person shall vote at an election in any constituency if he is subject to any of the disqualifications referred to in section 16 of the representation of the people act, 1950 (43 of 1950).(3) no person shall vote at a general election in more than one constituency of the same class, and if a person votes in more than one such constituency, his votes in all such constituencies shall be void.(4) no person shall at any election vote in the same constituency more than once, not withstanding that his name may have been registered in the electoral roll for the constituency more than once, and if he does so vote, all his votes in that constituency shall be void.(5) no person shall vote at any election if he is confined in a prison, whether under a sentence of imprisonment or transportation or otherwise, or is in the lawful custody of the police:provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person subjected to preventive detention under any law for the time being in force."28. part vi of the 1951 act provides for resolution of disputes regarding elections. chapter i contains interpretation clauses; chapter ii deals with presentation of election petitions to the high court; chapter iii provides for trial of election petitions. section 87 provides for procedure before the high court. section 94 prohibits infringement of secrecy of voting. section 98 reads as under:"98. decision of the high court.- at the conclusion of the trial of an election petition (the high court) shall make an order-(a) dismissing the election petition; or(b) declaring the election of (all or any of the returned candidates) to be void; or(c) declaring the election of (all or any of the returned candidates) to be void and the petitioner or any other candidate to have been duly elected."29. section 100(1)(d) reads as follows:"100. grounds for declaring election to be void.-(1) subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) if the high court is of opinion-x x x(d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a returned candidate, has been materially affected-(iii) by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any vote which is void, or(iv) by any non-compliance with the provisions of the constitution or of this act or of any rules or orders made under this act, the high court shall declare the election of the returned candidates to be void."30. in terms of the 1950 act, the central government made registration of electors rules, 1960 thereinafter referred to as 'the 1960 rules'). in terms of the 1960 rules any person whose name has been deleted from the published draft roll will have to file an application for inclusion of his name.31. part 11 thereof concerns "electoral rolls for assembly constituencies". rule 5 provides that the roll shall be divided into convenient parts. rules 10 and 11 contemplate the publication of draft rolls in the first place and inviting of objections, if any thereto.32. rule 12 reads as under:"12. period for lodging claims and objections.- every- claim for the inclusion of a name in the roll and every objection to an entry therein shall be lodged within a period of thirty days from the date of publication of the roll in draft under rule 10, or such shorter period of not less than fifteen days as may be fixed by the election commission in this behalf:provided that the election commission may, by notification in the official gazette, extend the period in respect of the constituency as a whole or in respect of any part thereof."33. rule 13 provides that every claim shall be made in form no. 6 and signed by the person desiring his name to be included in the roll. sub-rule (2) of rule 13 provides that every objection to the inclusion of a name in the roll shall be in form no. 7 and preferred only by a person whose name is already included in that roll. sub-rule (3) of rule 13 provides that every objection to a particular or particulars in an entry in the roll shall be made in form no. 8 and preferred only by the person to whom that entry relates.34. rules 14 to 20 provides for the mode and manner in which claims and objections and inquiry in relation thereto shall be made.35. rule 21 provides for inclusion of names inadvertently omitted. rule 21a provides for deletion of names. the said rules are as under:"21. inclusion of names inadvertently omitted. (1) if it appears to the registration officer that owing to inadvertence of error during preparation, the names of any electors have been left out of the roll and that remedial action should he taken under this rule, the registration officer shall-(a) prepare a list of the names and other details of such electors;(b) exhibit on the notice board of his office a copy of the list together with a notice as to the time and place at which the inclusion of these names in the roll will be considered, and also publish the list and the notice in such other manner as he may think fit; and(c) after considering any verbal or written objections that may be preferred, decide whether all or any of the names should be included in the roll.(2) if any statements under rule 7 are received after the publication of the roll in draft under rule 10, the registration officer shall direct the inclusion of the names of the electors covered by the statements in the appropriate parts of the roll."21a. deletion of names. - if it appears to the registration officer at any time before the final publication of the roll that owing to inadvertence or error or otherwise, the names of dead persons or of persons who have ceased to be, or are not, ordinarily residents in the constituency or of persons who are otherwise not entitled to be registered in that roll, have been included in the roll and that remedial action should betaken under this rule the registration officer, shall-(a) prepare a list of the names and other details of such electors;(b) exhibit on the notice board of his office a copy of the list together with a notice as to the time and place at which the question of deletion of these names from the roll will be considered and also publish the list and the notice in such other manner as he may think fit; and(c) after considering any verbal or written objections that may be preferred, decide whether all or any of the names should be deleted from the roll:provided that before taking any action under this rule in respect of any person on the ground that he has ceased to be, or is not, ordinarily resident in the constituency, or is otherwise not entitled to be registered in that roll, the registration officer shall make every endeavour to give him a reasonable opportunity to show cause why the action proposed should not be taken in relation to him."36. rule 22 provides for final publication of roll. clause (b) of sub-rule (1) mandates the registration officer to publish the roll, together with the list of amendment, by making a complete copy thereof available for inspection and displaying a notice in form no. 16 at his office. sub-rule (2) of rule 22 provides that on such publication, the roll together with the list of amendments shall be the electoral roll of the constituency. rule 25 provides for revision of rolls. rule 26 provides for correction of entries and inclusion of names in electoral rolls. in terms of the said rule, a claim or objection must be filed in duplicate, one copy of which shall be posted in some conspicuous place in the office of the registration officer together with a notice inviting objections thereto within a period of seven days from the date of such posting. sub-rule (4) of rule 26 provides as under;"(4) the registration officer shall, as soon as may be after the expiry of the period specified in sub-rule (3), consider the application and objections thereto, if any, received by him and shall, if satisfied, direct the inclusion, deletion, correction or transposition of entries in the roll, as may be necessary: provided that when an application is rejected by the registration officer, he shall record in writing a brief statement of his reasons for such rejections."37. form no. 16 referred to in clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of rule 22 is as under;"form 16(see rule 22(1)notice of final publication of electoral rollit is hereby notified for public information that the list of amendments to the draft electoral roll for the ... constituency has been prepared with reference to ... as the qualifying date and in accordance with the registration of electors rules, 1960. a copy of the said roll together with the said list of amendments has been published and will be available for inspection at my office.. . .electoral registration officer place ... (address) ...date .... ...."findings:re. question no. 1electoral roll.38. the purport and object of preparation of an electoral roll cannot be under-estimated in view of the fact that thereby the persons included therein make the persons to decide as to whether they can contest election where for an enlistment of a voter is necessary. electoral roll is also helpful for the candidates to assess their chance of success. for reference to final electoral roll, it is also required by the candidates to enable them to canvass amongst the voters. availability of a final electoral roll with the candidate is, thus, a matter of great importance for him. there cannot further be any doubt whatsoever that the right to vote having regard to section 62 of the 1951 act vis-a-vis article 326 of the constitution of india is a valuable right. a person in terms of section 62 of the 1951 act is entitled to exercise his right of franchise or is disabled therefrom if his name does or does not find place in the electoral roll.whether section 23(3) of the 1950 act as well as requirement of publication of electoral roll is mandatory?39. sub-section (3) of section 23 of the 1950 act in no uncertain terms provides for statutory injunction upon the authorities to make any revision in the electoral roll after the last date fixed which indisputably having regard to the law laid down by this court in a number of decisions would mean 3 p.m. of the date of filing the nominations.40. the rules referred to hereinbefore clearly lay down the procedure for filing the claims and objections and the mode and manner in which they are to be dealt with. in terms of the 1960 rules, a claim or an objection can be entertained only at least seven days prior to the date of filing of nominations inasmuch as such claim in form no. 6 is to be posted on the notice board inviting objections before seven days as is required in terms of rule 26. claims or objections could have, therefore, been entertained at least upto 16.4.2001. p.w. 1, however, states that no objection which was filed after the said date was entertained.sub-section (3) of section 23 of 1950 act is mandatory:41. sub-section (3) of section 23 ex facie is imperative in character. it has been couched in a negative language. the word 'shall' has also been used. what is thereby, however, prohibited is that after 3 p.m. of the date specified for filing of the nomination no correction by way of amendment, transposition or deletion of the entry can be made.publication of electoral roll, however, is not mandatory.42. the question which has been posed is whether the publication of the electoral roll was permissible after 3 p.m. on 23.4.2001. the submission of the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant to the effect that having regard to the provisions contained in section 21 of the 1950 act, and rule 22 of the 1960 rules publication of an electoral roll is imperative in character, cannot be accepted.43. section 21 of the 1950 act speaks of preparation and revision of electoral rolls. sub-section (1) mandates that it shall come into force immediately upon its final publication in accordance with the rules made thereunder. when such finality would be attained, however, is a question of importance. the publication of an electoral roll, having regard to sub-section (2) of section 21 can be revised in the prescribed manner by reference to the qualifying date. the said electoral roll is also required to be revised in any year in the prescribed manner by reference to the qualifying date. the proviso appended to sub-section (2) of section 21 states that if the electoral roll is not revised, the validity or continued operation of the said electoral roll shall not thereby be affected. sub-section (3) of section 21 empowers the election commission to direct a special revision.44. what is, therefore, contemplated under sub-section (1) of section 21 is a publication of final roll upon the revision thereof to be made in the prescribed manner. the manner in which such a revision would take place is enumerated in the 1960 rules. the rules, however, do not prescribe as to when such formal publication shall be made. form no. 16, as referred to hereinbefore clearly states that upon consideration of the claims and objections filed by the affected persons the registration officer shall publish the amendment carried out in the mother roll. the mother roll in this case has been published in the year 1999. final revision had also taken place in the years 2000 and 2001. as noticed hereinbefore, revision in 2001 had taken place in two periods, namely, from 15.3.2001 to 16.3.2001 and from 21.4.2001 to 23.4.2001. indisputably, the revision carried out in the year 2000 as also during 2001 would be valid in law. having regard to the provision contained in sub-section (3) of section 23 of the 1950 act, there cannot be any doubt that any order passed immediately before 3 p.m. on 23.4.2001 would be valid. the very fact that sub-section (3) of section 23 prohibits any amendment, transposition or deletion of any entry after the last for making nominations for an election in that constituency is a pointer to the fact that till 3 p.m. of the date specified for filing nominations, directions for any amendment can be issued. any order passed on the claims or objections filed in terms of section 22 of the act read with relevant provisions of the 1960 rules would relate back from the date of publication of the electoral roll. any amendment, transposition or deletion made in the electoral roll pursuant to or in furtherance of the directions made by the competent authority in the electoral roll upto 3 p.m. of the specified date for filing nominations would, therefore, be valid. it would not, therefore, be correct to contend that any publication of final roll which is made after 3 p.m. on 23.4.2001 would render the entire electoral roll invalid in law. in terms of sub-section (3) of section 23 of the 1950 act what would be invalid is the addition or deletion of names which have been made by the statutory authorities after 3 p.m. on the same date. it may be true that a person whose name appeared in the electoral roll at the time of filing of the nomination cannot be deleted thereafter and similarly no new names can be added. but the purport and object of sub-section (3), as noticed hereinbefore, is to enable a person to exercise his right of affording his candidature cannot be taken away. if the name of such person was not included in the mother roll, his remedy was only to file an application for inclusion of his name in terms of rule 26 of the 1960 rules. it would, thus, bear repetition to state that the same has to be filed at least seven days prior to the date specified for filing nomination and not thereafter.45. an order on such application, therefore, was required to be passed in terms of section 22 of the 1950 act read with relevant provisions of the 1960 rules immediately prior to 3 p.m. of the specified date for filing nominations. once such directions are issued, evidently, publication of the list in terms of form no. 16 would be only upon incorporation of directions for making amendment, transposition or deletion of names. whenever publication of electoral roll is made in form 16, necessary corrections have to be carried out in the mother roll. these are ministerial acts. however, in the event any amendment, transposition or deletion is made after 3 p.m. the same would be invalid in law. by reason of any direction which is made after 3 p.m. neither any person whose name has been added becomes entitled to vote nor a person whose name has been deleted becomes disentitled therefrom. the right of such a person to vote or not to vote must be determined in terms of the position of the electoral roll as it stood at 3 p.m. on the date of filing of the nominations.principles as to whether a statute is mandatory or directory:46. a statute as is well-known must be read in the text and context thereof. whether a statute is directory or mandatory would not be dependent on the user of the words "shall" or "may". such a question must be posed and answered having regard to the purpose and object it seeks to achieve.47. what is mandatory is the requirement of sub-section (3) of section 23 of the 1950 act and not the ministerial action of actual publication of form 16.48. the construction of statute will depend on the purport and object for which the same had been used. in the instant case the 1960 rules do not fix any time for publication of the electoral rolls. on the other hand section 23(3) of the 1950 act categorically mandates that direction can be issued for revision in the electoral role by way of amendment in inclusion and deletion from the electoral roll till the date specified for filing nomination. the electoral roll as revised by reason of such directions can therefore be amended only thereafter. on the basis of direction issued by the competent authority in relation to an application filed for inclusion of a voter's name, a nomination can be filed. the person concerned, therefore, would not be inconvenienced or in any way be prejudiced only because the revised electoral role in norm 16 is published a few hours later. result of filing of such nomination would become known to the concerned parties also after 3.00 p.m.49. furthermore even if the statute specifies a time for publication of the electoral roll, the same by itself could not have been held to be mandatory. such a provision would be directory in nature. it is well-settled principle of law that where a statutory functionary is asked to perform a statutory duty within the time prescribed therefor, the same would be directory and not mandatory. (see shivshewar prasad sinha v. the district magistrate of monghyr and anr. manu/bh/0030/1966manu/bh/0030/1966 : air1966pat144 , nomita chowdhury v. the state of west bengal and ors. 1999 (2) clj 21 and garbari union co-operative agricultural credit society limited and anr. v. swapan kumar jana and ors. 1997 (1) chn 189.50. furthermore, a provision in a statute which is procedural in nature although employs the word "shall" may not be held to be mandatory if thereby no prejudice is caused. (see raza buland sugar co. ltd. v. municipal board, rampur, manu/sc/0226/1964manu/sc/0226/1964 : [1965]1scr970 , state bank of patiala v. s.k. sharma manu/sc/0438/1996manu/sc/0438/1996 : (1996)iillj296sc , venkataswamppa v. special dy. commr. (revenue) manu/sc/0139/1997manu/sc/0139/1997 : air1997sc503 and rai vimal krishna and ors. v. state of bihar and ors. manu/sc/0455/2003manu/sc/0455/2003 : air2003sc2676 .51. the court cannot, it is trite, supply casus omissus. reference in this regard may be made on dr. baliram waman hiray v. mr. justice b. lentin and ors. manu/sc/0582/1988manu/sc/0582/1988 : [1989]176itr1(sc) , wherein it was observed:"law must be definite, and certain. if any of the features of the law can usefully be regarded as normative, it is such basic postulates as the requirement of consistency in judicial decision-making. it is this requirement of consistency that gives to the law much of its rigour. at the same time, there is need for flexibility. professor h.l.a. hart regarded as one of the leading thinkers of our time observes in his influential book 'the concept of law', depicting the difficult task of a judge to strike a balance between certainty and flexibility:where there is obscurity in the language of a statute, it results in confusion and disorder. no doubt the courts so frame their judgments as to give the impression that their decisions are the necessary consequence of predetermined rules. in very simple cases it may be so; but in the vast majority of cases that trouble the courts, neither statute nor precedents in which the rules are legitimately contained allow of only one result. in most important cases there is always a choice. the judge has to choose between alternative meanings to be given to the words of a statute or between rival interpretations of what a precedent amounts to. it is only the tradition that judges 'find' and do not 'make' law that conceals this, and presents their decisions as if they were deductions smoothly made from clear pre-existing rules without intrusion of the judge's choice."[see also kanta devi (smt.) v. union of india and anr. manu/sc/0226/2003manu/sc/0226/2003 : [2003]2scr99252. in shrimati tarulata shyam and ors. v. commissioner of income-tax, west bengal manu/sc/0195/1977manu/sc/0195/1977 : [1977]108itr345(sc) , it was held that if there be a casus omissus, the defect ran be remedied only by legislation and not by judicial interpretation.53. rule 22(b) of the 1960 rules cannot, therefore, be interpreted to mean that publication of the electoral roll must lake place before the time of filing nomination and not thereafter.case laws operating in the field:54. in baidyanath panjira (supra), it is stated:"the question for consideration is whether it was within the competence of the electoral registration officer to amend the electoral rolls after the last date for making the nomination was over."55. in baidyanath panjiar (supra), upon considering the scheme of the act and the principles underlying thereunder the court held that sub-section (3) of section 23 is mandatory having regard to the provision of section 62 of the act. it was opined:"...in view of that provision the electoral roll referred to in section 62(1) of the act must be understood to be the electoral roll that was in force on the last day for making the nominations for the election.9. it was next urged that even if we hold that in including fresh electors in the electoral roll on april 27, 1968, the electoral registration officer contravened section 23(3) of the 1950 act, the same cannot be made a ground for invalidating the election as the contravention in question does not come within the purview of sub-section (1) of section 100 of the act. this contention again does not appear to be sound. clause (d)(iii) of sub-section (1) of section 100 of the act provides that if the high court is of the opinion that the result of the election in so far as it concerns the returned candidate has been materially affected by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any vote which is void, it shall declare the election void. we have earlier come to the conclusion that the electoral registration officer had no power to include new names in the electoral roll on. april 27, 1968. therefore votes of the electors whose names were included in the roll on that date must be held to be void votes. that conclusion satisfies one of the conditions prescribed in section 100(1)(d)."56. in narendra madivalapa (supra), a two-judge bench of this court following baidyanath panjiar (supra) reiterated that sub-section (3) of section 23 is mandatory. the question which arose therein revolved round the inclusion of the 16 names in the electoral roll. therein the court was considering an election of the local body of bidar district. the said 16 votes were directed to be ignored from the total tally of the returned candidate. the court in the fact of that case exercised its jurisdiction in issuing a direction upon the high court to send for the ballot papers, pick out the 16 ballots relating to the bidar board, examine them without exposing the identify of the persons who had voted and to whom they had voted and record a re-tally excluding these 16 tainted votes from the respective candidates.57. the said decision was considered in i. vikheshe sema (supra). in that case also the invalid votes were directed to be rejected. however, in that case the high court did not pass any order on the application filed by the respondent therein. the respondent therein contended that the ballot papers should be summoned and examined in order to find out the void votes and how the said votes affected the outcome of the election. in the aforementioned situation, this court made the following observation whereupon the learned counsel or the appellant placed strong reliance:"14. once the high court was convinced, and it was evident from the facts on record that a large number of void votes had been received and they could have affected the outcome of the election, then it was under a duty to have taken the next logical step which would have been to examine the votes which had been cast, exclude the void votes and then re-count the valid votes in order to come to the conclusion whether the reception of the void votes had materially affected the result of the returned candidate. without undertaking this exercise the high court was wrong in coming to the conclusion that the election of the appellant had been materially affected and that the same should be set aside."58. the said observations were made having regard to the fact that an application to that effect was filed.59. however, in d.b. raju (supra), l.m. sharma (as his lordship then was) speaking for the bench held that any publication made after the specified time under section 33 would be bad in law. the learned judge opined:"14. the vital difference between an act of a legislature and a sub-ordinate legislation was earlier noted in harla v. state of rajasthan manu/sc/0014/1951manu/sc/0014/1951 : [1952]1scr110 . the acts of the legislature are passed by the accredited representatives of the people who in theory can be trusted to see that their constituents know what has been done, and this is done only after debates take place which are open to the public. the matter receives wide publicity through the media. but the case is different with the delegated legislation and, it we may add, also in the case of orders passed by the authorities like that in the present appeal before us. the mode of publication can vary but there must be reasonable publication of some sort. a reference may also be made to decision in fatma haji ali mohammad haji v. state of bombay manu/sc/0044/1951manu/sc/0044/1951 : [1951]2scr266 , which the question as to whether certain powers given to the government for issuing a direction to the collector not to act in accordance with the prescribed rules had been actually exercised or not was under consideration. it was stated that the power had to be exercised in clear and unambiguous terms and, (scr p. 275)"the decision that the power has been exercised should be notified in the usual manner in which such decisions are made known to the public."60. with utmost respect, we are unable to subscribe to the extreme views for the reasons stated hereinbefore.61. in lal babu hussein (supra), this court was considering a situation where without giving an opportunity to the voters to place the relevant materials and solely acting on a police report removed the name of the voters for undertaking a special intensive revision. the court held that even for that purpose the procedure must be followed.62. the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has placed strong reliance on a constitution bench decision of this court in radhey shyam dani (supra). therein the constitution bench was considering an election held under ajmer merwara municipalities regulation. the name of the respondent was incorrectly described, his father's name had been mentioned as ratan lal instead of chitar mal. he filed an application for correction but no order was passed thereon. his nomination was, however, rejected on the ground that he was not one of the voters. in that situation the election was set aside stating:"it is of the essence of these elections that proper electoral rolls should be maintained and in order that a proper electoral roll should be maintained it is necessary that after the preparation of the electoral roll opportunity should be given to the parties concerned to scrutinize whether the persons enrolled as electors possessed the requisite qualifications. opportunity should also be given for the revision of the electoral roll and for the adjudication of claims to be enrolled therein and entertaining objections to such enrolment. unless this is done, the entire obligation cast upon the authorities holding the elections is not discharged and the elections held on such imperfect electoral rolls would acquire no validity and would be liable to be challenged at the instance of the parties concerned. it was in our opinion, therefore, necessary for the chief commissioner to frame rules in this behalf, and in so far as the rules which were thus framed omitted these provisions they were defective."63. the said judgment is clearly distinguishable and cannot be held to have any application in the instant case.64. the learned counsel also relied upon a judgment of the division bench of the madhya pradesh high court in hafiz mohammad anwar khan (supra) wherein in a petition for issuance of a writ of quo warranto the election was set aside on the ground that the electoral roll was invalid."it is no doubt true that the petitioner could have moved this court earlier for appropriate relief even before the election was held, but the relief now claimed is in the nature of a writ of quo warranto questioning the right of the respondents 6 to 13 to hold their offices. there is in such a case no question of delay or estoppel. on the other hand, as we have already indicated, no election on the basis of the rolls such as those in this case can be allowed to stand. "65. we do not think that the said decisions lay down the correct principles of law.66. strong reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the appellant a.c. jose v. sivan pillai and ors. manu/sc/0341/1984manu/sc/0341/1984 : [1984]3scr74 for the proposition that the election contrary to the scheme of the 1951 act and the 1960 rules would be void. in that case the commission in exercise of its power under article 324 of the constitution of india issued a notification directing that the votes be cast by mechanical process in 50 out of 84 polling stations in a particular constituency in the state of kerala. the respondent therein was declared elected from that constituency defeating the appellant by a margin of 123 votes only. the validity of the said notification was questioned. this court set aside the election of the respondent with respect of the 50 polling stations where voting machines were used stating that by exercise of its power under article 324 of the constitution of india, no direction could be issued by the commission in contravention of the parliamentary legislation. it was held that article 324 of the constitution relating to superintendence, direction and control was actually vesting merely executive powers and not the legislative powers. in the aforementioned situation, the election was set aside as voting machines were used in certain constituencies contrary to law.67. a.c. jose (supra) is not an authority for the proposition that although some irregularity has been committed, an election otherwise valid will have to be declared void even without arriving at a finding that the same has materially affected the result. the question as regard the applicability of section 100(1)(d) of the 1951 act was not examined therein nor in the fuels and circumstances obtaining therein it was necessary to he examined.re: question no. 2effect of section 100(1)(d) of 1951 act:68. the appellant herein has filed an election petition for declaring the election of the respondent herein as void. for obtaining the aforementioned relief, it was necessary for him to show that amendment, addition or deletion in the electoral roll alter 3.00 p.m. on 23.4.2001 had indeed materially affected the result of the election.69. the law as it stands, in our opinion, would require a strict pleading and proof of the factors enumerated in section 100 of the 1951 act for obtaining a declaration that the election was a void one. such a declaration can only be made upon consideration of the materials brought on records. the election tribunal will have jurisdiction to issue such a direction only in the event one or the other factors enumerated in the sub-clauses contained in sub-section (1) of section 100 of the 1951 act are fulfilled and not otherwise.70. the appellant herein has not placed any material to show as to names of how many persons were added, or deleted after 3.00 p.m. as discussed hereinbefore, even those electoral rolls have not been produced before the high court for its comparison. whether the provision of section 100(1)(d) of the 1951 act is required to be mandatorily complied with or not fell for consideration in vashit narain sharma (supra). in no uncertain terms it was held that the burden of proof would be on the election petitioner.71. in vashit narain sharma (supra), this court observed:"but we are not prepared to hold that the mere fact that the wasted votes are greater than the margin of votes between the returned candidate and the candidate securing the next, highest number of votes must lead to the necessary inference that the result of the election has been materially affected. that is a matter which has to be proved and the onus of proving it lies upon the petitioner. it will not do merely to say that all or a majority of the wasted votes might have gone to the next highest candidate. the casting of votes at an election depends upon a variety of factors and it is not possible for any one to predicate how many or which proportion of the votes will go to one or the other of the candidates. while it must be recognized that the petitioner in such a case is confronted with a difficult situation, it is not possible to relieve him of the duty imposed upon him by section 100(1)(c) and hold without evidence that the duty has been discharged. should the petitioner fail to adduce satisfactory evidence to enable the court to find in his favour on this point, the inevitable result would be that the tribunal would not interfere in his favour and would allow the election to stand."72. the said view was reiterated in mahadeo v. babu udai partap singh and ors. manu/sc/0219/1965manu/sc/0219/1965 : [1966]2scr564 . as noticed hereinbefore, even baidyanath panjiar (supra) whereupon the learned counsel, appearing on behalf of appellant placed strong reliance, this court while holding the provisions of section 23(3) of the 1950 act to be mandatory held that the said illegality committed in the matter of amendment in the electoral roll has materially affected the result as envisaged under section 100(1)(d) of the 1951 act was required to be proved.73. the question raised herein is squarely covered by a three-judge bench decision of this court in g.k. samal (supra) wherein following vashit narain sharma (supra), it was held:"on the material on record we agree with the high court that it has not been shown that the result of the election had been materially affected by the casting of votes by persons whose names were added to the electoral roll on april 27, 1968 and the alleged non-voting of 15 former electors whose names had been deleted."74. upon considering the pleadings in the election petition this court opined:"the high court was rightly impressed by the omission of any allegation that all or majority of the persons whose names were included in the electoral roll for the first time in the evening of april 27, 1968, were the supporters of respondent no. 1 in the election. the learned counsel has not been able to show us any evidence which might indicate how many of the first preference votes counted in favour of respondent no. 1 were polled at jamshadpur, adityapur or jugsalai respectively.on the facts and the pattern of voting it is impossible to say that there was any substantial number of votes counted in favour of respondent no. 1 which were void while those counted in favour of the petitioner were of the original electors."75. in paokai haokin (supra) this court in no uncertain terms held that if there existed a lacuna in the legislation, it is for it to provide for a remedy stating:"in our opinion, the decision of the learned judicial commissioner that the election was to contravention of the act and the rules was correct in the circumstances of this case; but that does not alter the position with regard to section 100(1)(d)(iv) of the act. that section requires that the election petitioner must go a little further and prove that the result of the election had been materially affected. how he has to prove it has already been stated by this court and applying that test, we find that he has significantly failed in his attempt and therefore the election of the returned candidate could not be avoided."76. chhedi ram (supra) was decided in somewhat peculiar situation. an election petition was filed on the ground that a nomination of one moti ram had been improperly accepted. the winning candidate obtained 17,822 votes and the appellant herein got 17,449 votes leaving a margin of 373 votes. the said moti ram secured 6710 votes. the election petition was filed that moti ram was not entitled to seek election from the reserved constituency being kahar by caste and not a member of the scheduled caste. in the peculiar fact and circumstances of this case and in particular having regard to the fact that 6710 votes obtained by moti ram, were almost 20 times the difference between the number of votes secured by and successful candidates and the candidate securing the next highest number of votes; it was held that an impossible burden of proof cannot be thrown upon the appellant therein. this court observed:"the number of votes secured by the candidate whose nomination was improperly accepted bore a fairly high proportion to the number of votes secured by the successful candidate- it was a little over one-third. surely, in that situation, the result of the election may safely be said to have been affected."77. the bench while agreeing with the observation of ghulam hasan, j. in vashit narain sharma (supra), however, opined:"it does not, however, mean that whatever the number of wasted votes and whatever the margin of difference between the number of votes secured by the successful candidate and the number of votes secured by the next highest candidate, the court would invariably hold that the result of the election had not been materially affected. in an appropriate case having regard to the margin of difference between the votes secured by the successful candidate and the candidate securing the next highest number of votes and the proportion which such margin bears to the wasted votes, it is permissible for the court to hold that the burden of proving that the result of the election has been materially affected has been discharged."78. chhedi ram (supra), therefore, is not a decision which can be said to be an authority for the proposition that the number of votes which were liable to be rejected would itself be a barometer for the purpose of arriving at a conclusion that the burden of the election petitioner to prove the legal requirement of section 100(1)(d) of the 1951 act stands discharged.79. the said decision was rightly held to have been rendered in the peculiar fact situation of that case in shiv charan singh (supra) and santosh yadav (supra) on, thus, does not constitute a binding precedent.80. in santosh yadav (supra) this court held:"the learned senior counsel for the appellant placed heavy reliance on chhedi ram v. jhilmit ram manu/sc/0205/1983manu/sc/0205/1983 : [1984]1scr966 and submitted that the ratio of the decision squarely applies to the present case and should govern the decision thereof. it was submitted that in chhedi ram case manu/sc/0205/1983manu/sc/0205/1983 : [1984]1scr966 the candidate whose nomination was improperly accepted had obtained 6710 votes which was almost 20 times the difference between the number of votes secured by the successful candidate and the candidate securing the next highest number of votes. so also the number of votes secured by the candidate whose nomination was improperly accepted bore a fairly high proportion to the number of votes secured by the successful candidate- a little over 1/3rd. the learned senior counsel submitted that on availability of these twin factors it was held by this court that "the result of the election might safely be said to have been affected"; while the case of the present appellant stands on a much better footing inasmuch as the number of votes secured by shri naresh yadav is almost 59 times of the margin between the votes secured by the appellant and the respondent.at the first blush the submission appears to be attractive but is found to be devoid of merit on closer scrutiny. chhedi ram case manu/sc/0205/1983manu/sc/0205/1983 : [1984]1scr966 came up for the consideration of this court at least on three occasions. in shiv charan case manu/sc/0439/1988manu/sc/0439/1988 : [1988]2scr713 , tek chand case manu/sc/0048/2001manu/sc/0048/2001 : [2001]1scr527 and j. rao manu/sc/0670/1993manu/sc/0670/1993 this court has held that chhedi ram case manu/sc/0205/1983manu/sc/0205/1983 : [1984]1scr966 rested "on its own facts" and did not overrule the earlier decisions of this court, namely, the decisions in vashist narain sharma case manu/sc/0101/1954manu/sc/0101/1954 : [1955]1scr509 and samant n. balkrishna case manu/sc/0270/1969manu/sc/0270/1969 : [1969]3scr603 . in chhedi ram case manu/sc/0205/1983manu/sc/0205/1983 : [1984]1scr966 not only the proportion of wasted votes was 20 times of the margin, there were six candidates in all in the election fray. the court formed an opinion that a reasonable probability was raised in favour of holding that the result of the election had been materially affected. the decision in chhedi ram case manu/sc/0205/1983manu/sc/0205/1983 : [1984]1scr966 does not set out detailed facts and circumstances and the nature of the evident adduced which may have persuaded the court in arriving at a finding in favour of the election petitioner. in view of the earlier decisions of this court existing before chhedi ram case manu/sc/0205/1983manu/sc/0205/1983 : [1984]1scr966 was decided, it cannot be held that merely because the number of wasted votes bears a high degree of proportion to the margin of votes between the winning candidate and the next highest candidate, an inference must always be drawn that the result of the election was materially affected insofar as the returned candidate is concerned. there must be definite evidence available before the court enabling an inference being drawn as to how the wasted votes would have been distributed amongst the contesting candidates. the court cannot conjectures or return findings on surmises."81. the view taken by this court in vashit narain sharma (supra) has consistently been followed also in j. chandra sekhara rao, uma ballav rath (smt.), tek chand and a recent decision of this court in harsh kumar v. bhagwan sahai rawat and ors. manu/sc/0614/2003manu/sc/0614/2003 : air2003sc3693 .82. the appellant herein has not been able to show that names of how many persons were included after 3 p.m. on 23.4.2001 and how they have exercised their right of franchise. he has also failed to show by adducing any evidence that those persons whose names had been omitted would have voted for the second respondent. the least the appellant could do was to file an appropriate application before the tribunal praying for inspection of ballot papers to find out the void votes which had been accepted so as to enable the high court to arrive at a conclusion how casting of such void votes affected the outcome of such election. further for inspection of ballot papers, the election petition must make out a strong prima facie case, only after setting out material facts in the election petition and leading evidence to that effect.83. the learned counsel, however, would submit that such an application was not necessary to be filed as it was the duty of the court to issue such directions. reliance in this connection had been placed on i. vikheshe sema (supra). in that case such an application was filed but no order had been passed in that situation.84. the fact of the matter obtaining therein was absolutely different. furthermore, as noticed hereinbefore, therein such an application had been filed and this court merely held that without passing any order on such an application and without inspection of the ballot papers, the high court could not have arrived at a finding that the result was materially affected. the fact of that case was converse to the present case.85. for the reasons aforementioned, we do not find any merit in this appeal which is dismissed accordingly. no costs.
dipak misra, j.1. the present appeal, by special leave, assails the judgment and order dated 20.08.2007 passed by national consumer disputes redressal commission, new delhi (for short "the commission') in first appeal no. 189 of 2007 whereby it has affirmed the judgment and order dated 15.2.2007 passed by the state consumer disputes redressal commission, union territory of chandigarh (for short, "the state commission") in complaint case no. 82/2002(pb)/rbt no. 46 of 2006 wherein the state commission had rejected the claim of the complainant-appellant on two counts, namely, the claim was barred by limitation, and that under the postulates of the policy, it was totally untenable.2. the factual score that is essential to be depicted is that the appellant, a small scale industry and a proprietary concern dealing in handicraft goods, being desirous of exporting its goods to a buyer, namely, m/s. treasures of india, atlanta, usa took insurance cover from the first respondent on 15.6.1999 and accordingly the appellant was issued a shipment comprehensive risk policy on the same date. the maximum liability of the respondent-insurer under the policy was rs. 30 lakhs. the insurer had initially granted provisional credit limit of rs. 8 lakhs on 14.7.1999 in respect of m/s. treasures of india which was enhanced to rs. 10 lakhs on 20.7.1999 and later on enhanced to rs. 20 lakhs. the appellant had sent one consignment of rs. 6,50,000/- to m/s. treasures of india on 15.7.1999 and a declaration to that effect was duly sent to the respondents. be it noted, the appellant has arrayed the export credit guarantee corporation limited, nariman point, mumbai through its managing director and the same corporation at suryakant complex, ludhiana through its branch manager as respondents 1 and 2 respectively. as averred, the appellant had obtained further orders from the aforesaid buyer and the shipments were required to be sent immediately. the appellant kept writing to the respondents to send the approval for the additional limit in respect of the said buyer. on 20.8.1999 the appellant made another shipment of rs. 4,76,139/- to the said buyer and a declaration to that effect was also sent to the respondents. the appellant received further orders from the buyer but the corporation had not accorded approval for the additional credit. under these circumstances the appellant had sent two shipments amounting to rs. 2,77,732/- and 1,00,512/- on 20.8.1999. it is the case of the appellant that the said two shipments were sent at its own risk as the corporation had not accorded the additional limit as asked for. when the matter stood thus, on 29.9.1999 the appellant was informed by its bank that the buyer had refused to accept the documents negotiated with the drawee bank i.e. sun trust atlanta, usa in respect of the shipments sent vide invoices dated 15.7.1999 and 20.8.1999 and accordingly the documents were returned. since the buyer had refused to accept the goods which had already been exported from india, the appellant on 22.10.1999 intimated the corporation regarding non-acceptance of documents by the buyer. the appellant also informed the respondent-corporation regarding the shipment which was not covered through insurance by letter dated 10.12.1999.3. as the factual matrix would further unfurl, on 22.12.1999 the corporation sent a communication stating that the approved limit was rs. 20 lacs, and it required the appellant to comply with the formalities on the prescribed format. on 11.1.2000, the corporation asked the appellant the reason for non-payment and to explore the possibilities and further negotiate with the buyer and to take steps. thereafter, the appellant sent a letter for payment of the aforesaid claim and as there was no response to the said communication, it sent reminders to process the claim with expediency. in response to said letters the respondents on 6.6.2000 repudiated the claim by stating that the corporation's liability was not attracted because of series of unavoidable lapses.4. being aggrieved by the aforesaid communication, the appellant approached the state commission for redressal of its grievance. though two appeals were filed, the state commission treated them as one appeal. the respondents before the state commission took two preliminary objections that the complaint was barred by limitation, and it had not been filed by the authorised person. the state commission, appreciating the factual matrix in entirety came to hold that the complaint had been filed by a properly authorised person but it was barred by limitation. however, the state commission proceeded to deal with the matter on merits and in that regard came to hold that:27. the shipment made on 20.8.99 vide invoice no. 006 for rs. 4,76,139/-, whose copy is annexure p-13 cannot be taken into consideration because complainant had changed the terms of payment which had been mentioned as 60 days da i.e. payment after 60 days of delivery while it is mentioned to be 90 days da in annexure p-9 i.e. payment on acceptance of documents within 90 days from the date of shipment and not 60 days. it has been stated in the insurance policy under the terms and conditions, whose copy is annexure p-4 under heading "general" in conditions 28 and 29 that due performance and observance of each term and condition contained herein or in the proposal or declaration shall be a condition precedent to any liability of the corporation hereunder and if the insured fails to comply with the condition, then policy shall be deemed to have been waived. since, complainant failed to comply with condition of 90 days da with respect to 2nd shipment dated 20.8.99 for rs. 4,76,139/- as term of payment was changed to 60 days da instead of 90 days da, so, op was absolved from making payment of this amount.28. the further case of complainant is that buyer did not retire the documents and had refused to accept the goods and as such documents were returned to punjab & sind bank. nothing is known as to what happened to the goods which were whipped through invoice no. 005 on 15.7.99 or invoice no. 006 dated 20.8.99. it is stated in annexure p-35 that the goods were lying in bonded warehouse. it is not known what steps were taken by the complainant to get those goods sold and to retrieve some money. the bills were not got 'noted and protested' through a notary. it is alleged that the drawee's bank had refused to get the documents 'noted and protested'. if complainant had taken some steps then perhaps goods had been retrieved or could have been auctioned and some money would have been got but complainant did not bother for goods shipped considering that op was bound to make payment of those goods. there is no evidence that complainant had written any letter to the debt collecting agency in usa. thus, the complainant did not take proper steps to safeguard the goods and as such is not entitled to claim the amount. complainant should have safeguarded the goods by opening letter of credit but it failed to do so. there is no letter from drawee's bank sun trust international atlanta, usa that it had 'noted and protested' the documents. no steps were taken to bring back goods. certainly act of the complainant is against terms and conditions of the policy and as such is not entitled to the claimed amount.5. the unsuccess before the state commission constrained the appellant to prefer a first appeal before the commission which did not agree with the finding of the state commission that the complaint was barred by time. however, the commission referred to the terms and conditions of the policy, specifically condition no. 28, 29, the exclusion clause no. 7 of the policy, referred to the communication dated 26.1.2000 which was a reply given by the respondent to the letters dated 15.1.2000 and 18.1.2000 of the appellant, the communication of repudiation, emphasised on the unilateral change of terms and conditions relating to the terms of payment, the non-taking of steps by the appellant for retrieving the goods and accordingly opined that there had been violation of the terms of the policy and the appellant had not been diligent to protect the shipment. being of this view, it dismissed the appeal.6. we have heard mr. nidhesh gupta, learned senior counsel for the appellant and mr. bharat sangal, learned counsel for the respondents.7. on a scrutiny of facts, it is clear as crystal that one consignment of rs. 6,50,000/- was sent to m/s. treasures of india on 15.7.1999 and a declaration to that effect was also communicated to the respondents. similarly, on 20.8.1999, the appellant made another shipment of rs. 4,76,139/- to the same buyer i.e. m/s. treasures of india and declaration was sent to the corporation. it is also undisputed that the appellant had sent two shipments amounting to rs. 2,77,732/- and rs. 1,00,512/- on 20.8.1999. the stand of the appellant is that as the earlier two transactions covered the credit limit of rs. 10 lakhs and as the corporation was causing undue delay in granting the limit, the latter two consignments were sent at the risk of the appellant. as the buyer refused to accept the goods, the appellant communicated the same on 22.10.1999 to the corporation and on 10.12.1999 intimated regarding the shipments which were not covered under the insurance. it is the stance of the appellant that the corporation communicated on 22.12.1999 stating that the approved limit was rs. 20 lakhs and asked the appellant to intimate on the prescribed format, which was duly complied with by the appellant, but despite such a situation, the corporation vide letter dated 6.6.2000 repudiated the claim of the appellant. the relevant part of the communication by the insurer is reproduced hereinbelow:1. the terms of payment mentioned in order form as da-90 days via sea, but you have effected the shipment worth rs. 4,76,139/- by air on da-60 days. as far as shipment worth rs. 6,50,000/- effected on da-90 days is concerned, the invoice shows the terms of payment as da-90 days, whereas the bill of exchange was drawn on da-60 days basis. this is construed as a violation of contract on the part of you.2. you have omitted to declare shipments amounting to 50% in number and 34% in value. this is considered as serious and uncondonable lapse, violating clauses nos. 1, 2, 8(a) 10, 19(1), 28, 7(a) and 29 of the policy bond.3. bill was not noted and protested at buyer's country.8. the crux of the matter whether the reasons ascribed for repudiation by the insurer withstand scrutiny. mr. nidhesh gupta, learned senior counsel has commended us to certain authorities, which, according to him, are relevant when a court is required to construe an insurance policy. we shall refer to the authorities first and thereafter in the backdrop of the ratio laid down therein shall scrutinize the various clauses in the insurance policy and express our views with regard to the issue whether they are applicable to the case at hand and if so, whether such applicability would demolish the claim of the appellant.9. at the outset, it may be stated that contracts of insurance are contracts of uberrima fides and every material fact is required to be disclosed. in united india insurance co. ltd. v. m.k.j. corpn. manu/sc/0113/1997manu/sc/0113/1997 : (1996) 6 scc 428, a two-judge bench has observed:it is a fundamental principle of insurance law that utmost good faith must be observed by the contracting parties. good faith forbids either party from concealing (non-disclosure) what he privately knows, to draw the other into a bargain, from his ignorance of that fact and his believing the contrary. just as the insured has a duty to disclose, "similarly, it is the duty of the insurers and their agents to disclose all material facts within their knowledge, since obligation of good faith applies to them equally with the assured".regard being had to these principles, the authorities cited by mr. gupta, learned senior counsel for the appellant are to be seen.10. in amalgamated electricity co. v. ajmer municipality manu/sc/0372/1968manu/sc/0372/1968 : (1969) 2 scr 430 : air 1969 sc 227, though in a different context, it has been held that:in construing the true nature of the contract entered into between the parties, the contract has to be read as a whole and if so read it is clear that what the plaintiff undertook was to pump water from the wells in question and not to supply any electrical energy. hence we are in agreement with the learned judges of the high court that the plaintiff's case in this regard should fail.11. in bay berry apartments (p) ltd. and anr. v. shobha and ors. manu/sc/8566/2006manu/sc/8566/2006 : (2006) 13 scc 737, the court has observed that in construing a document, the court cannot assign any other meaning; and a document as is well known must be construed in its entirety.12. in polymer india (p) ltd. and anr. v. national insurance co. ltd. and ors. manu/sc/1019/2004manu/sc/1019/2004 : (2005) 9 scc 174, this court has held thus:19. in this connection, a reference may be made to a series of decisions of this court wherein it has been held that it is the duty of the court to interpret the document of contract as was understood between the parties. in the case of general assurance society ltd. v. chandumull jain manu/sc/0180/1966manu/sc/0180/1966 : (1996) 3 scr 500 : air 1966 sc 1644, it was observed as under:in interpreting documents relating to a contract of insurance, the duty of the court is to interpret the words in which the contract is expressed by the parties, because it is not for the court to make a new contract, however reasonable, if the parties have not made it themselves.20. similarly, in the case of oriental insurance co. ltd. v. samayanallur primary agricultural coop. bank manu/sc/0702/1999manu/sc/0702/1999 : (1999) 8 scc 543, it was observed as under:the insurance policy has to be construed having reference only to the stipulations contained in it and no artificial far-fetched meaning could be given to the words appearing in it.21. therefore, the terms of the contract have to be construed strictly without altering the nature of the contract as it may affect the interest of parties adversely.13. learned senior counsel for the appellant has also drawn inspiration from the decision in general assurance society ltd. v. chandmull jain manu/sc/0180/1966manu/sc/0180/1966 : (1966) 3 scr 500 : air 1966 sc 1644, rendered by the constitution bench wherein it has been held that:in other respects there is no difference between a contract of insurance and any other contract except that in a contract of insurance there is a requirement of uberrima fides i.e. good faith on the part of the assured and the contract is likely to be construed contra proferentem that is against the company in case of ambiguity or doubt. a contract is formed when there is an unqualified acceptance of the proposal. acceptance may be expressed in writing or it may even be implied if the insurer accepts the premium and retains it. in the case of the assured, a positive act on his part by which he recognises or seeks to enforce the policy amounts to an affirmation of it. this position was clearly recognised by the assured himself, because he wrote, close upon the expiry of the time of the cover notes that either a policy should be issued to him before that period had expired or the cover note extended in time. in interpreting documents relating to a contract of insurance, the duty of the court is to interpret the words in which the contract is expressed by the parties, because it is not for the court to make a new contract, however reasonable, if the parties have not made it themselves. looking at the proposal, the letter of acceptance and the cover notes, it is clear that a contract of insurance under the standard policy for fire and extended to cover flood, cyclone etc. had come into being.14. mr. gupta, learned senior counsel for the appellant has also drawn our attention to baj (run off) ltd. v. durham and ors. (2012) uksc 14, wherein the supreme court of united kingdom, while interpreting the contract of insurance has opined:to resolve these questions it is necessary to avoid over-concentration on the meaning of single words or phrases viewed in isolation, and to look at the insurance contracts more broadly. as lord mustill observed in charter reinsurance co. ltd. v. fagan (1977) ac 313, 384, all such words "must be set in the landscape of the instrument as a whole" at p.381, any "instinctive response" to their meaning "must be verified by studying the other terms of the contract, placed in the context of the factual and commercial background of the transaction". the present case has given rise to considerable argument about what constitutes and is admissible as part of the commercial background to the insurances, which may shape their meaning. but in my opinion, considerable insight into the scope, purpose and proper interpretation of each of these insurances is to be gained from a study of its language, read in its entirety. so, for the moment, i concentrate on the assistance to be gained in that connection.15. relying on the authorities which have been stated by mr. gupta, it is submitted by him that the policy between the parties is required to be read as a whole and on a reading of the policy in entirety, it is clear that the declaration of all the shipments whether covered under the policy or not, is not mandatory and only the shipments in respect of which claims are lodged are required to be declared. as an alternative submission, it is urged by him that the respondent-corporation had vide letter dated 26.1.2000 deducted premium in respect of the two undeclared shipments from the credit balance of the appellant and, therefore, the respondent-corporation had itself ratified the action of the appellant of sending the aforesaid two shipments and under these circumstances, it was not justified on its part in rejecting the claim of the appellant on the foundation that there had been non-declaration of the said shipments. to buttress the concept of ratification, he has commended us to the authorities in high court of judicature for rajasthan v. p.p. singh manu/sc/0050/2003manu/sc/0050/2003 : (2003) 4 scc 239, marathwada university v. seshrao balwant rao chavan manu/sc/0311/1989manu/sc/0311/1989 : (1989) 3 scc 132 and babu varghese v. bar council of kerala manu/sc/0168/1999manu/sc/0168/1999 : (1999) 3 scc 422. we think it appropriate that this submission of mr. gupta has to be dealt with while construing the other clauses of the policy.16. mr. gupta, while criticizing the repudiation of the claim, has drawn our attention to clause 3 of the communication which states that the bill was not noted and protested at buyer's country and in that regard argued that the ascription of the said reason is beyond the terms and conditions of the policy, for it has nowhere been prescribed in the policy that insured has to get the bill noted and protested at buyer's country in order to claim the amount under the policy. it is argued by him that the terms of the policy are to be construed strictly and neither any addition nor any subtraction from it is permissible. to substantiate the said stand, he has placed reliance on united india insurance co. ltd. v. harchand rai chandan lal manu/sc/0803/2004manu/sc/0803/2004 : (2004) 8 scc 644.17. the aforesaid authorities being basically pronouncements pertaining to the construction to be placed on a policy, we shall proceed to deal with the terms and conditions of the policy. we may hasten to add that mr. bharat sangal, learned counsel for the respondent-corporation has basically urged that there has been gross violation of the terms and conditions of the policy and the clauses in policy have to be read as they are inasmuch as there is no ambiguity in any of the clauses. as regards the interpretation, he has placed reliance on oriental insurance co. ltd. v. sony cheriyan manu/sc/0495/1999manu/sc/0495/1999 : (1999) 6 scc 451, wherein it has been held thus:the insurance policy between the insurer and the insured represents a contract between the parties. since the insurer undertakes to compensate the loss suffered by the insured on account of risks covered by the insurance policy, the terms of the agreement have to be strictly construed to determine the extent of liability of the insurer. the insured cannot claim anything more than what is covered by the insurance policy. that being so, the insured has also to act strictly in accordance with the statutory limitations or terms of the policy expressly set out therein.18. apart from the aforesaid authority, he has also commended us to two decisions of the commission wherein claim was rejected and he has been emboldened to do so as one of the orders was assailed before this court in civil appeal no. 8052 of 2004, and this court has dismissed the appeal in limine.19. presently to the basic anatomy of the policy. at the outset it is essential to state that we, in due course, refer to the clauses of the policy in extenso as learned counsel for both the parties have relied upon, but prior to that the framework of the policy is apposite to be indicated. the initial part of the policy refer to the risks insured and the proviso appended thereto. clause 2 of the policy, as is evident, requires the insured to disclose the facts at the date of issue of the policy and also at all times during the operation of the policy that affect the risks of the insured. clause 3 deals with covering of shipments and exceptions. the said coverage is subject to terms and conditions of the policy. clause 5 deals with shipments which are not covered and includes grant of credit of the insured to the buyer for a period longer than 180 days from the date of shipment. clause 7, requires the insured to notify to the corporation of the occurrence of any event likely to cause a loss maximum within 30 days. clause 8(a) requires a declaration to be given as regards the shipment. clause 14b(b) states that the goods that have not been delivered remains the property of the insured and any resale thereof by the insured shall be with the prior approval of the corporation. clause 19 that deals with the exclusion of liability under sub-clause (a) stipulate that if the insured has failed to declare, without any omission, all the shipments required to be declared in terms of clause 8(a) of the policy and to pay premium in terms of clause 10 of the policy, the insurer would not be liable unless otherwise agreed to by the corporation in writing. clause 28 provides for observance of conditions which specifically states that due performance and observance of each term and condition contained in the policy or the declaration or the proposal or declaration shall be a condition precedent to fasten liability on the corporation. clause 29 deals with the failure to comply with the conditions. it says that no failure by the insured to comply with the terms and conditions of the policy would bee deemed to have been waived, excused or accepted by the corporation unless there has been express waiver by the corporation in writing. clause 30 deals with uncovered risks and states that if any account or bill in respect of any shipment declared exceeds the limits provided under the policy, no acknowledgement of the declaration of the corporation, no payment or tender of premium by the insured shall be deemed to bind the corporation to undertake the liability. these are the basic components of the policy.20. learned counsel for the respondents has contended that the appellant has violated clauses 3, 7, 8, 19, 27, 28 and 29 of the policy. relying on the authorities which we have referred to hereinbefore, if clauses 2 and 10 are read together, it becomes quite clear that the premium is payable only in respect of the shipments to which the policy applies. the appellant had sent two shipments at its own risk as the credit limit already stood exhausted and no cover was sought by the appellant in respect of the said shipments. in this backdrop, submission of mr. gupta, learned senior counsel for the appellant is that policy does not cover the two shipments and hence, there was no obligation on the part of the appellant to declare the same to the respondent-corporation. referring to clause 8(a), it is contended by him that the words used therein i.e. all shipments have to be understood in the backdrop of clause 10 and clause 10 uses the word "relevant declaration" and, therefore, only relevant declarations are to be made. referring to the concept of premium, contends mr. gupta, that the premium payable is on the gross invoice value and all shipments to which the policy applies and the said premium is payable to the corporation while submitting the relevant declaration of the shipment as per clause 8(a) of the policy and, therefore, the payment to be made under clause 10 is in relation to the gross invoice value of all shipments to which the policy applies and the declaration to be made under clause 8(a) is also in relation thereto. emphasising on the language employed in clause 14b(b), it is urged by him that the policy envisages the liability of the corporation with regard to only such shipments which are intended to be covered and the corporation is not liable to suffer the loss and the insured will not get the benefit of the shipments which are not covered under the insurance cover. criticizing the reliance on clause 30 by the learned counsel for the respondents, it is highlighted by mr. gupta that it deals with uncovered risks inasmuch as the words used are "not in accordance with the policy" and in the case at hand at best the two undeclared shipments can be termed as not in accordance with the policy and the same can be treated as uncovered risks. in any case, there is no claim in respect of the same. as far as the reduction of the debts from 90 days to 60 days, it has been canvassed that it is within the outer limit and no exception can be taken to the same.21. another aspect which has been highlighted by him is that the commission has returned a finding that the appellant has not taken any steps to retrieve the goods and has not communicated anything to the debt collecting agency. it is argued that there is no obligation under the policy conditions to do so and, in fact, the appellant had taken all requisite steps as suggested by the corporation vide letter dated 11.1.2000. in any case, as per clause 23 of the policy, there is a postulate that the respondent-corporation has to make payment to the appellant of the amount due under the policy and only after payment of such amount, the corporation could ask the insured to take steps as stipulated in the clause and, therefore, the finding recorded by the commission is absolutely misconceived. as far as writing to the debt collecting agency is concerned, learned senior counsel has seriously criticized the finding recorded by the commission on the ground that there are documents to show that it had communicated as per the address given by the corporation and there was a communication by the insured to the insurer that the address was incorrect and the registered letter sent by him had returned. the request sent at the correct address remained unresponded.22. first, we shall deal with clause 5 that deals with the shipments not covered. the said clause reads as follows:5. shipments not covered. except with the approval in writing of the corporation (which the corporation shall not be obliged to give), this policy shall not apply to any shipment which:(a) is made under a contract or agreement of sale which does not specify the nature, the quantity and price of the goods sold or agreed to be sold, the due date of payment and the currency in which the payment is to be made;(b) is invoiced to any buyer in a currency not permitted by the exchange control laws, rules and/or regulations for the time being in force in india;(c) involves granting of credit by the insured to the buyer for a period longer than 180 days from the date of shipment unless specifically agreed to the contrary by the corporation in writing.23. clause 5(c) of the policy, as we find, requires the grant of credit by the insured to the buyer not for a longer period than 180 days unless specifically agreed to the contrary by the corporation in writing. as per the letter dated 2.9.1999, the appellant has shown the terms of payment due within 90 days of the shipment. the appellant had given a credit of 60 days which is well within the outer limit of 90 days. if the clause 5(c) is properly understood, in the obtaining factual matrix we are unable to agree with the findings recorded by the state commission and the commission that there has been violation of the terms of the policy as regards the reduction of the period for payment. what is stipulated is that the corporation should not be liable if the insured gives credit for more than 180 days. that is the outer limit and as the insured has fixed the debt within the said period, that cannot be held against him.24. the second violation of condition relates to omission of declaration of shipments amounting to 50% in number and 30% in value. the corporation has considered the said lapse as serious and uncondonable being violative of clauses 1, 2, 7(a), 8(a), 10, 19(a), 28, and 29 of the policy. to appreciate the controversy in an appropriate manner, we reproduce the said clauses hereunder:1. proposal and declaration: the proposal and the declaration therein shall be the basis of this policy and shall form part thereof and if any of the statements contained in the proposal or the declaration be untrue or incorrect in any respect, this policy shall be void but the corporation may retain any premium that has been paid.2. disclosure of facts: without prejudice to any rule of law it is declared that this policy is given on condition that the insured has at the date of issue of this policy disclosed and will at all times during the operation of this policy promptly disclose all facts in any way affecting the risks injured.xxx xxx xxx7. obligations of the insured: the insured shall:(a) use all reasonable and usual care, skill and forethought and take all practicable measures, including any measures which may be required by the corporation, (including if so required the institution of legal proceedings) to prevent or minimize loss.8. declarations:(a) declarations of shipments: on or before the 15th day of each calendar month, the insured shall deliver to the corporation a declaration, in the form prescribed by the corporation, of all shipments made by him during the previous month. if no shipment has been made during a month, a 'nil' declaration shall nevertheless be submitted.xxx xxx xxx10. incidence of premium and payment of additional premium: the insured shall be liable to pay premium, at the rates set out in schedule-ii hereto, or, as the case may be, at such other rates for the time being in force, on the gross invoice value of all shipments to which this policy applies forthwith on the making of such shipments and shall pay to the corporation additional premium, if any, that may become due and payable after adjustment of the minimum premium referred to hereinabove, while submitting the relevant declaration of shipments as per clause 8(a) of this policy.xxx xxx xxx19. exclusion of liability: notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this policy, unless otherwise agreed to by the corporation in writing, the corporation shall cease to have any liability in respect of the gross invoice value of any shipment or part thereof, if;(a) the insured has failed to declare, without any omission, all the shipments required to be declared in terms of clause 8(a) of the policy and to pay premium in terms of clause 10 of the policy.xxx xxx xxx28. observance of conditions: the due performance and observance of each term and condition contained herein or in the proposal or declaration shall be a condition precedent to any liability of the corporation hereunder and to the enforcement thereof by the insured.29. failure to comply with conditions: no failure by the insured to comply with the terms and conditions of the policy shall be deemed to have been waived, excused or accepted by the corporation unless the same is expressly so waived, excused or accepted by the corporation in writing and such waiver, excuse or acceptable shall be subject to such terms and conditions as the corporation may stipulate, including a reduction in the percentage specified under clause 30 of this policy being the percentage of loss payable by the corporation.25. as has been held in chandmull jain (supra) by the constitution bench that in a contract of insurance, there is a requirement of good faith on the part of the insured and in case of ambiguity, it has to be construed against the company. as per other authorities, the insurance policy has to be strictly construed and it has to be read as a whole and nothing should be added or subtracted. that apart, as has been held in polymer india (p) ltd. (supra), it is the duty of the court to interpret the document as is understood between the parties and regard being had to the reference to the stipulations contained in it.26. keeping in view the aforesaid parameters of law, we are required to appreciate the stipulations in the policy pertaining to rejection on the said score. clause 8(a) which deals with declarations, assumes significance. the said clause requires that before the 15th day of each calendar month, the insured shall deliver to the corporation a declaration in the prescribed format of all shipments made by him during the previous month and if no shipment has been made during a month, a 'nil' declaration shall nevertheless be submitted. clause 9 deals with minimum premium and clause 10 with incidence of premium and payment of additional premium. clause 19(a), as has been indicated earlier, deals with exclusion of liability. clause 19, the exclusionary clause, categorically states that unless otherwise agreed to by the corporation in writing, the corporation shall cease to have any liability in respect of gross invoice value of any shipment or part thereof if the insured has failed to declare, without any omission, all the shipments required to be declared in terms of clause 8(a) of the policy and to pay premium in terms of clause 10 of the policy. submission of mr. sangal is that these clauses are binding on the insured and he cannot play with the requirements at his own will. mr. gupta, learned senior counsel, as we have noted earlier, has contended that these clauses are to be read in juxtaposition with clauses 2, 10 and 30, for the policy has to be read in entirety and so read, the clauses do not require that all shipments are to be declared. to appreciate the submission, we think it appropriate to reproduce clauses 2, 10, and 30:2. disclosure of facts: without prejudice to any rule of law it is declared that this policy is given on condition that the insured has at the date of issue of this policy disclosed and will at all times during the operation of this policy promptly disclose all facts in any way affecting the risks injured.xxx xxx xxx10. incidence of premium and payment of additional premium: the insured shall be liable to pay premium, at the rates set out in schedule-ii hereto, or, as the case may be, at such other rates for the time being in force, on the gross invoice value of all shipments to which this policy applies forthwith on the making of such shipments and shall pay to the corporation additional premium, if any, that may become due and payable after adjustment of the minimum premium referred to hereinabove, while submitting the relevant declaration of shipments as per clause 8(a) of this policy.xxx xxx xxx30. uncovered risks: if any account or bill (or any extension or renewal thereof) in respect of any shipment declared hereunder exceeds the limits hereinbefore provided or is otherwise not in accordance with the policy, no acknowledgement of the declaration by the corporation and no payment or tender of premium by the insured shall be deemed to bind the corporation to undertake liability in respect of such account or bill (or to approve of the renewal or extension).27. mr. gupta, learned senior counsel for the appellant has laid immense emphasis on the words that the insured shall "disclose all the facts" in any manner affecting the risks insured. similarly, he has also highlighted the words "on the gross invoice value of all shipments to which this policy applies" occurring is clause 10. clause 30, as mr. gupta would submit, deals with uncovered risks which are not in accordance with the policy. it is his submission that payment of premium in respect of uncovered risks shall not bind the corporation to undertake the liability. the preponement propounded by mr. gupta, on a first blush, seems quite attractive, but on a keener scrutiny it has to pale into insignificance. terms of the policy are to be strictly construed. there can be no cavil about the proposition of law that in case of ambiguity, the construction has to be made in favour of the insured. clauses 8(a) and 19(a) deal with declarations and the exclusion of liability respectively. they are absolutely specific. clause 2 deals with disclosure of facts. clause 10 deals with incidence of premium and payment of additional premium and clause 30 with uncovered risks. clause 8(a) and 19(a), which we have reproduced hereinabove are absolutely clear as crystal and as per the stipulations therein the insured has been cast an obligation under the policy. he is obliged under the policy to deliver to the corporation a declaration on or before 15th day of each calendar month in a prescribed format details of all shipments made during the previous month and even he is required to give a 'nil' declaration if no shipment has been made. clause 19(a) refers to the declaration in terms of clause 8(a). it also uses the word "without any omission". it adds a further postulate relating to payment of the premium in terms of clause 10. the prescription of twin requirements in clause 19(a) are cumulative. they cannot be read in segregation. the insured has to declare the shipments in terms of clause 8(a) without omission and also pay the premium in terms of clause 10. premium of payment alone does not make the corporation liable to indemnify the loss or fasten the liability on it. it is also required on the part of the insured for the purpose of sustaining the claim to show that there has been compliance as regards the declaration. to construe clause 8(a) that the insured has a choice to declare which shipment he would cover and which ones he would leave, would run counter to the mandate of the policy. it has to be borne in mind that these are specific clauses relating to the obligations of the insured. the attempt on the part of the appellant to inject concept of payment of premium and the risk covered to this realm would not be acceptable. the general clauses basically convey which risks are covered and which risks are not covered, how the premium is to be computed and paid. what eventually matters is where the liability of the insurer is exclusively excluded, the said clauses of the policy are absolutely clear, unequivocal and unambiguous. the insured after availing a policy in commercial transactions is to understand the policy in entirety. the construction of the policy in entirety and in a harmonious manner leaves no room for doubt that there is no equivocality or ambiguity warranting an interpretation in favour of the insured-appellant. whatever the reasons the appellant may give, he having not declared as prescribed in clause 8(a), which is again reiterated by way of reference in clause 19(a), the exclusionary clause, it will be an anathema to the concept of interpretation of contract of insurance of such a nature, if liability is fastened on the insurer. the finding of the commission that the appellant had not take steps to retrieve the goods is absolutely immaterial for the present purpose. the said finding though is flawed, the ultimate conclusion, which is based upon our independent analysis, is correct.28. before parting with the case we must take note of another aspect which has been highlighted by mr. gupta relying upon the decision in abl international ltd. and anr. v. export credit guarantee corporation of india ltd. and ors. manu/sc/1080/2003manu/sc/1080/2003 : (2004) 3 scc 553 in the said case the export credit guarantee corporation of india ltd., an instrumentality of state, had repudiated the claim of the claimant against which a writ petition was filed before the learned single judge of the calcutta high court praying for quashment of the repudiation. the learned single judge after hearing parties came to the conclusion that the dispute between the parties arose out of a contract of insurance and the first respondent being a state for the purpose of article 12, was bound by the terms of the contract and accordingly allowed the writ petition. in intra-court appeal the division bench opined that the claim of the writ petitioner involved disputed questions of fact and hence, could not be adjudicated in a writ proceeding under article 226 of the constitution. however, it proceeded to state that the learned single judge had erroneously applied the law and further came to hold that the insured had violated certain terms of the contract. this court referred to number of decisions as regards the maintainability of the writ petition and expressed the view that merely because one of the parties to the litigation raises a dispute in regards to the facts of the case, the court entertaining such petition under article 226 of the constitution is not always bound to relegate the parties to a suit. after so holding the court opined once the state or instrumentality is a party to the contract, it has an obligation in law to act fairly, justly and reasonably which is the requirement of article 14 of the constitution of india, and therefore, being the instrumentality of the state, the corporation had acted in contravention of the requirements of article 14, and hence, the writ court could issue appropriate writ to nullify the arbitrary action. the court referred to relevant clauses of contract of insurance in the background of admitted facts. the contract of insurance between the insured and insurer was primarily based on the contract between exporter and the kazak corporation. the relevant clause in regard to payment of the tea exported was incorporated in clause 6. the said clause came to be amended on the very same day when the contract was signed by the exporter and the kazak corporation by way of an addendum. the court opined the addendum in the obtaining facts therein had become an integral part of the original clause 6 of the contract. the court further proceeded to deal with the clauses in the agreement and held that alternative modes of payment of consideration were permissible as per clause 6. in that context the court further opined:the terms of the insurance contract which were agreed between the parties were after the terms of the contract between the exporter and the importer were executed which included the addendum, therefore, without hesitation we must proceed on the basis that the first respondent issued the insurance policy knowing very well that there was more than one mode of payment of consideration and it had insured failure of all the modes of payment of consideration. from the correspondence as well as from the terms of the policy, it is noticed that existence of only two conditions has been made as a condition precedent for making the first respondent corporation liable to pay for the insured risk, that is: (i) there should be a default on the part of the kazak corporation to pay for the goods received; and (ii) there should be a failure on the part of the kazakhstan government to fulfil their guarantee.after so stating the court ruled that there was no violation of the stipulations of the contract by the insured. while dealing with the grant of relief the court referred to the decision in kumari shrilekha vidyarthi v. state of u.p. manu/sc/0504/1991manu/sc/0504/1991 : (1991) 1 scc 212 and held thus:53. from the above, it is clear that when an instrumentality of the state acts contrary to public good and public interest, unfairly, unjustly and unreasonably, in its contractual, constitutional or statutory obligations, it really acts contrary to the constitutional guarantee found in article 14 of the constitution. thus if we apply the above principle of applicability of article 14 to the facts of this case, then we notice that the first respondent being an instrumentality of the state and a monopoly body had to be approached by the appellants by compulsion to cover its export risk. the policy of insurance covering the risk of the appellants was issued by the first respondent after seeking all required information and after receiving huge sums of money as premium exceeding rs. 16 lakhs. on facts we have found that the terms of the policy do not give room to any ambiguity as to the risk covered by the first respondent. we are also of the considered opinion that the liability of the first respondent under the policy arose when the default of the exporter occurred and thereafter when the kazakhstan government failed to fulfil its guarantee. there is no allegation that the contracts in question were obtained either by fraud or by misrepresentation. in such factual situation, we are of the opinion, the facts of this case do not and should not inhibit the high court or this court from granting the relief sought for by the petitioner.29. mr. gupta learned senior counsel has laid immense emphasis on the aforequoted paragraph. we have analysed the decision to appreciate the context and the factual score as depicted in the decision which clearly show that the court had arrived at indubitable conclusion that there had been no violation of the terms of the contract of insurance. therefore, the said decision in our considered opinion is not applicable to the facts of the present case as in the instant case, as has been held earlier, there have been violations of the terms and conditions of the contract of insurance. we are compelled to observe that the said decision possibly has been cited as an authority as the respondent-corporation was also the respondent therein.30. consequently, the appeal, being devoid of merit, stands dismissed. however, we refrain from awarding any costs.
n. santosh hegde, j.1. the appellant along with 3 others was charged for offences punishable under section 302 read with section 34 ipc and sections 25 and 27 of the arms act (the act). in the said trial, the appellant was arrayed as accused no. 4 (a-4) before the sessions judge, rohtak. after trial, the learned sessions judge came to the conclusion that the prosecution has failed to prove the case against all the accused persons and acquitted all of them of the charges. it is relevant to mention herein that during the trial a-1 kanwar singh died and the proceedings had abated as against him. being aggrieved by the order of acquittal, the state preferred an appeal before the high court of punjab & haryana at chandigarh in crl. appeal no. 238/dba/89. the high court by its judgment dated 9.11.1995 allowed the appeal so far as the present appellant is concerned, and convicted him of an offence punishable under section 302 ipc and sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for life with a fine of rs. 5,000/- in default to further undergo ri for one year. the high court also found the appellant guilty of an offence punishable under sections 25 and 27 of the arms act and imposed a sentence of ri for one year with a fine of rs. 1,000/-; in default ri for 6 months on that count. it directed both the sentences to run concurrently. the state appeal against the acquittal of a-2 and a-3 was dismissed by the high court, therefore, the appellant is now before us in this appeal.2. briefly stated, the prosecution case is that the accused, the deceased and the complainant were all closely related. there was a dispute between kanwar singh a-1 and deceased hari om (allegedly murdered by the accused). it is the further case of the prosecution, which, of course, is not disputed, that the appellant in this appeal was serving the central reserve police force at jammu was on orders of transfer to tripura. en route to his place of posting, he had taken some leave to visit his ailing sister at the village, hence, he had come to the village. pursuant to the said dispute, it is stated that on the night before 16.3.1986 a-1 kanwar singh had misbehaved by abusing deceased hari om, therefore, deceased hari om had decided to lodge a police complaint on the next day i.e. 16.3.1986. with the said intention, it is stated that the deceased hari om with pw-3 raj bala and pw-7 gayatri on that day proceeded towards the police station at about 9 a.m. and on the way the four accused persons who were hiding in a nullah waylaid the deceased hari om and a-1 shot at him first with a countrymade pistol but the same did not fire. thereafter, it is stated that the appellant shot with a single barrel gun at the deceased in the chest and hari om died because of the said shot. the incident as stated above, was witnessed by pws. 3 and 7. it is the further case of the prosecution that the accused persons after killing hari om threatened pws.3 and 7 that if they named them they would eliminate their entire family, and fled from the place of the incident. the further case of the prosecution is that on hearing about the incident, pw-6, the brother of pw-3 came to the spot. on his coming, pws.3 and 7 left him at the spot and proceeded to the police station to lodge a complaint which was done around 10.15 a.m. at the police station which is stated to be only 3 kms. away from the scene of the occurrence. the complaint in question was lodged by pw-3. the investigating officer after making the necessary diary entries and sending the special report proceeded to the place of the incident along with pws.3 and 7 and held the inquest. he recorded the statement of witnesses and sent the body for post mortem examination. the post mortem examination conducted by pw-1 established that the deceased hari om died of gun shot injuries. it is the further case of the prosecution that a-2 surrendered before the police on 20.3.1986 while a-1 and a-3 were arrested on 24.3.1986 and a-4 who had by then joined duty in tripura was allegedly arrested on 10.4.1986 and brought to the village on 17.4.1986. it is further stated that on a statement made by the appellant, a single barrel .12 bore gun was recovered from the house of a-3 who is the brother of the appellant herein which was kept concealed in the south western corner of the chabutra. on the basis of the above material gathered during the investigation the accused persons were charged as stated above, and the learned sessions judge having come to the conclusion that the prosecution has failed to establish the case against the accused persons acquitted them while the high court in appeal has convicted the appellant herein and acquitted the other two accused persons, a-1 in the meanwhile had died.3. we have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the records. the prosecution case as against this appellant rests on the oral evidence of pws.3 and 7. apart from the general evidence given as to the motive of a-1 to eliminate deceased hari om. so far as the present appellant is concerned, the prosecution also relies upon the alleged recovery of the weapon made from the house of a-3 at the instance of the appellant.4. the trial court while discussing the evidence of the prosecution came to the conclusion that the oral evidence of pws.3 and 4 cannot be relied upon because of the inherent improbabilities found herein. it came to the conclusion that factually if the appellants were hiding in a nullah and did not want to be identified, there was no need for these accused persons to have come in front of the witnesses so as to make themselves available for identification, because they could have very well shot the deceased from the place where they were hiding. it also came to the conclusion that the evidence of pws.3 and 7 that accused 2 and 3 held the deceased by his hands while the appellant shot him dead, was also highly improbable because there was no need to have held the deceased when he was available to be shot at point blank range by the appellant. the court noticed that knowing very well that the appellant was using .12 bore gun which sprays pellets, neither a-2 nor a-3 would have dared to hold the deceased from such close range because of the possibility of they also being injured in the process. it also noticed the fact that according to the evidence of the said eye-witnesses, deceased was shot at when he was lying down and he was being held by a-2 and a-3. if that be so, even according to the prosecution evidence itself, there should have been lot of blood at the place of the incident. on the contrary, the blood was found all over the left thigh and the leg of the victim indicating that the victim must have been shot at when he was standing. it also took note of the fact that both these witnesses were not permanent residents of gochi village, having been married to persons away from the village and they were admittedly visiting the village. the court also came to the conclusion that the appellant had absolutely no motive to assist a-1 in committing the crime in question because there was no enmity between him and the deceased. as a matter of fact, there was an earlier murder case in which the deceased had given evidence in favour of the family of the appellant against a-1 and so far as a-1 and deceased are concerned, the appellant was equally related. in such a situation the trial court doubted whether the accused would have been a party to such a ghastly murder. the said court also took note of the fact of the defence pleaded by the appellant that on the date of the incident he had left the village by 6 a.m. to proceed to tripura to join duty and had in fact joined duty there and it was from tripura that the appellant was arrested. the court also took note of the fact that the apparent conflict in the evidence of pw-5, the photographer and the evidence of pws.3 and 7 in regard to the time of the incident and correlating the evidence with that of the post mortem report, the court doubted the prosecution case as to the time of the incident. the learned sessions judge also doubted the veracity of the recovery of the single barrel gun at the instance of the appellant. on this basis, rejecting the prosecution case, it acquitted all the surviving accused persons.5. the high court on re-appreciation of the evidence came to the conclusion that the evidence of pws. 3 and 7 is acceptable evidence. the high court also held that the evidence of pw-5 in regard to the time of occurrence could be an error because of the lapse of time between the date of incident and his evidence. the high court also accepted the prosecution case that all the accused persons had assembled the plea of alibi put forth by the appellant and accepted the recovery evidence produced by the prosecution as against this appellant. but significantly, it disbelieved all these evidences including that of the eye-witnesses pws. 3 and 7, so far as other accused are concerned and dismissed the state appeal as against them, while it allowed the same in regard to the present appellant.6. we will now consider the case on the merits of the prosecution case as presented before the counts below. we notice that the appellant was gainfully employed with the crpf and was visiting the village to see his ailing sister en route to his place of transfer in tripura. there is no dispute in regard to this fact. there is also no dispute in regard to the fact that this appellant had no special reason to take sides with a-1 in a fight between a-1 and deceased; that too to go to the extent of committing a murder. it does not stand to reason why this appellant who is otherwise gainfully employed would take part in a crime of this nature without there being any special advantage to him nor there being any motive for him to be involved in the crime. the only case put forth by the prosecution in this regard is that the appellant and his brother were supporting a-1 in the dispute between a-1 and the deceased. assuming that it is true, it cannot be a ground for the appellant to be involved in a murder case that too taking active part. this is as far as the motive goes. in regard to the incident as such, we notice that there is a dispute as to the actual time of occurrence. pws.3 and 7 have stated that the incident in question had occurred at about 9 or 9.30 a.m. while pw-5 who is a government photographer, has clearly stated in his examination-in-chief itself that when he went to the village to take photographs of the dead body, it was an hour after sunrise which was in the month of march, therefore, there was a considerable difference between the two timing which is relevant for the purpose of appreciating the evidence of pws.3 and 7. the high court in this regard has found corroboration for pws.3 and 7 evidence from the stomach contents of the deceased as found in the p.m. report. we think this piece of evidence cannot always be relied on as conclusive evidence in the absence of there being some other evidence to show when the deceased had his last meal or when the deceased went to answer the call of nature. what intrigues us in this regard is the failure of the prosecution to clarify the time from pw-5 himself who has not been treated as a hostile witness, therefore, if there are two pieces of evidence in regard to the same fact both uncontroverted and uncorroborated then the benefit of doubt must be given to the accused. in the instant case, pw-5's evidence as to the timing has not been challenged by the prosecution. the trial court accepted that version. the high court refused to believe that solely on the ground that pw-5 had not recorded the time or he might have made mistake because he was giving evidence after considerable time - either of these reasons according to us, is not good enough to reverse the finding of the sessions court in this regard.7. coming to the evidence of pws.3 and 7, we notice they are not the permanent residents of the village gochi though they have every reason to visit the said village. therefore, in a manner of speaking, they could be said to be chance witnesses. we also do not find any special reason for these 2 witnesses to have accompanied the deceased when he was going to the police station to lodge a complaint. it is rather unusual for a person to take with him two young girls to a police station when he had the assistance of other grown up male members available at that time. no special reason whatsoever has been given by the prosecution to establish this unusual conduct. then we notice from the evidence of these 2 witnesses who have stated that at first all the accused persons were hiding in a nullah, obviously meaning thereby the accused did not want to disclose their identities. if that be so, as observed by the learned sessions judge, they could have very well shot the deceased from where they were hiding; more so because of the fact the appellant being a policeman, used to firearms, could have very well shot at and killed the deceased from where he was hiding. in that background, we are unable to understand the version of the eye-witnesses when they also said that all these 4 accused persons suddenly appeared from their hiding and came in front of the deceased, waylaid him and shot him dead. as observed by learned sessions judge, this sounds rather unusual. the next part of the evidence of these eye-witnesses shows that a-1 first pulled the trigger of his revolver which did not fire then this appellant shot at the deceased with his .12 bore gun on his chest. at one stage these witnesses say that deceased was shot at when he was standing; at another stage they say that he was pulled down by a-2 and a-3 who held his hands and was then shot at. these contradictions also throw a doubt in regard to the actual manner in which the accused attack the deceased. then as observed by learned sessions judge, it is highly unnatural for a-2 and a-3 to have held the deceased at such a close range while the appellant shot at him with the .12 bore gun which sprays pellets. as observed by the learned sessions judge, no sensible person would incur the risk of standing close to the victim when he is being shot at by a .12 bore gun from a close range. in our opinion, these statements made by pws. 3 and 7 are referred to us hereinabove, create sufficient suspicion in our minds to accept their evidence. then we notice even the high court has rejected the evidence of these witnesses in regard to a-2 and a-3. we do not find from the judgment of the high court any special reason why their evidence which was not acceptable in regard to a-2 and a-3 can be accepted in regard to the appellant. therefore, we think it not safe to rely on the evidence of these eye-witnesses.8. the high court has relied on the recovery of a .12 bore gun at the instance of the appellant while the sessions judge has not placed any reliance on this recovery. it is seen from the records that before the appellant was brought to the village, the house of a-3 was searched by the police and they did not find any weapon. it is a few days thereafter when the appellant was arrested. the prosecution alleges that on the basis of his statement the recovery of the gun was made from the chabutra near the house of a-3. the panch witness for this recovery has not supported the prosecution case. in such a situation and in the background of the fact that on an earlier search of the house, the police were unable to recover this gun it becomes doubtful whether a recovery as stated by the investigating agency can be believed, more so the panch witness has not supported the recovery. therefore, in our opinion even the recovery allegedly made at the instance of the appellant cannot be relied upon. if this be the conclusion in regard to the prosecution case we think it is not necessary to go into the defence put forth by the appellant because the prosecution should either succeed or fail on its own case. in the instant case we agree with the learned sessions judge that the prosecution has not established its case even against the appellant and the high court was in error in selectively accepting the evidence tendered by the prosecution in regard to the appellant to come to the conclusion that he is guilty of the offence charged.9. before concluding, we would like to point out that this court in number of cases has held that an appellate court entertaining an appeal from the judgment of acquittal by the trial court though entitled to re-appreciate the evidence and come to an independent conclusion it should not do so as a matter of routine. in other words, if from the same set of evidence two views are possible and if the trial court has taken one view on the said evidence, unless the appellate court comes to the conclusion that the view taken by the trial court is either perverse or such that no reasonable person could come to that conclusion or that such a finding of the trial court is not based on any material on record, it should not merely because another conclusion is possible reverse the finding of the trial court. [see: mohanlal hargovind dass v. ram narain and ors. 1979 (3) scc 279, state of punjab v. balraj singh alias chhajju manu/sc/0180/1978manu/sc/0180/1978 : 1978crilj1092 ,state of maharashtra v. wasudeo ramchandra kaidalwar manu/sc/0249/1981manu/sc/0249/1981 : 1981crilj884 and ram kumar pandey v. state of madhya pradesh manu/sc/0192/1975]. in the instant case also we find that the trial court had taken a view which the high court has not held to be either perverse, unreasonable or a finding which is not based on evidence, still on re-appreciation of the evidence, the high court came to a different conclusion which on facts of this case and on the basis of the ratio of the law laid down by this court in the above cited case cannot be sustained.10. for the reasons stated above, these appeals succeed. the judgment and conviction recorded by the high court as against this appellant is set aside. the appeals are allowed. if the appellant is in custody, he shall be released forthwith, if not required in any other case.
1. this is tenant's appeal by special leave. though the appeals are three in number, the subject matter is one common judgment and therefore, the three are being treated as one appeal. the suit premises are situated in the city of pune and governed by the provisions of the bombay rents, hotel and lodging house rates control act, 1947 (hereinafter "the act" for short). the suit premises are admittedly owned by respondent no. 1 and are held in tenancy by the appellant. proceedings for eviction of the appellants were initiated on very many grounds. at this state we are concerned only with the ground of eviction available order clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 13 of the (sic) which provides that a landlord shall be entitled to recover possession of any premises if the court is satisfied that the tenant has, without the landlord's consent given in writing, erected on the premises any permanent structure.2. incidentally, it may be stated that the suit premises where initially owned by one dattaraya chiplunkar, who died in the year 1974 and his widow, having succeeded to the rights in the property, transferred the same to the respondent no. 1 in the year 1978. the appellant came in the possession of the premises sometime in the year 1981 having acquired the tenancy rights from his predecessor in interest - one puram, who in turn had succeeded the tenancy rights from one shri niwas patki, who was inducted as tenant in the year 1941 by chiplunkar.3. it is not disputed that in the year 1961, the tenant-appellant has raised a permanent structure over the tenancy premises. the structure raised by the appellant consists of a dinning hall, a kitchen and lavatory. according to the landlord-respondent no. 1, the said construction was carried out without obtaining consent of the landlord and without having the building plans sanctioned by the municipal corporation. the plea taken by the appellant in the written statement is one of denial of the ground. i so far as the consent of the landlord to the alleged construction is concerned, the tenant pleaded -- "abutting to the road these defendants have constructed a building for restaurant in the year 1961. for that purpose the defendant 1 and 2 have taken a prior sanction of the pune municipal corporation and also the owner shri chiplunkar". the trial court found the ground for eviction not made out. on an appeal preferred by the landlord-respondents, the decree of the trial court was reversed. in the opinion of the appellate court, the ground for eviction under section 13(1)(b) of the act was made out. the aggrieved tenant preferred a petition under article 227 of the constitution in the high court of bombay, which has been dismissed.4. the crucial issue for decision is whether it can be said that the permanent construction raised by the tenant-appellant had the consent in writing of the landlord as the law requires.5. to being with, the written statement does not specifically plead the landlord having given the consent in writing for raising the permanent structure by the tenant. the particulars of the consent given by the landlord are also not pleaded. the vagueness in the pleadings raised in the written statement assumes some significance in the light of what transpired during the trial and before the high court. it appears that the case sought to be projected by the tenant-appellant before the trial court was that he had obtained the sanction of the municipal corporation for the structure raised by him. he being the tenant, the municipal corporation would not sanction the building plans unless the application for sanction was accompanied by the consent of the landlord. such consent was given by the landlord and formed part of the record in the custody of the municipal corporation. the tenant moved an application for obtaining certified copies of the relevant records but he was told that the record was not traceable. during the pendency of petition under article 227 of the constitution before the high court on 1st july, 1985, the tenant-petitioner moved an application in the high court submitting that the record which was earlier reported to be not traceable by the municipal corporation, was then traced out and, therefore, a prayed was made to the high court for summoning the record from the custody of the municipal corporation. the high court formed an opinion that the prayer for summoning the record could have been made to the trial court, which was not done, and therefore, there was no occasion much less a justification for allowing such a prayer made to the high court which was clearly belated and that too made during the hearing of a petition under article 227.6. it was submitted by the learned counsel for the appellants that the landlord had given a consent in writing, which was to be found in the records of the municipal corporation and the high court should have granted the appellants' prayer for summoning the record. it was further submitted that either the matter be remanded to the high court with the direction to summon the record, or, in the alternative, this court may summon the record from the custody of the municipal corporation. the prayer is vehemently opposed by learned counsel for the respondents submitting that the appellants' effort is to prolong the proceedings. it was submitted that there was no consent given and several relevant factors available on the record point out that the appellant is making an abortive attempt somehow to build up a case of consent wherein he has so far not succeeded.7. having heard the learned counsel for the parties, we are satisfied that no case is made out for interfering with the judgment of the appellant court as also the order of the high court.8. the plaint makes a positive averment of a negative fact, that is, the absence of consent in writing of the landlord to raising of the permanent structure by the tenant over the tenancy premises. in the wake of such averment in the plaint, it was necessary for the tenant to have raised specific pleading in the written statement setting out the particulars of the consent in writing. not only the particulars are not pleaded but event he factum of the landlord having given a consent in writing to the permanent construction is not stated. there is not even a whisper in the written statement of such consent, on which the tenant relies, having been ever given by the landlord and forming part of the record of the municipal corporation. if the municipal corporation had expressed its inability to make available certified copies of relevant records to the appellants, the appellants should have taken steps before the trial court for summoning the original record from the custody of the municipal authorities, which could have shown the bona fides of the plea raised by the tenant-appellant. nothing such was gone. similarly, no effort for production of the alleged consent on writing of the landlord appears to have been made during the pendency of the proceedings before the appellant court. in this background, the high court rightly declined to show its indulgence to a belated prayer for summoning the record from the custody of the municipal corporation.9. no fault can be found with the view taken by the high court. the appeals are held devoid of any merit and liable to be dismissed. they are dismissed accordingly. however, in view of the fact that the tenant-appellant has remained in occupation in the suit premises for a long time and is running his commercial activities therefrom. the appellant is allowed 12 months' time for vacating the suit premises subject to his filing usual undertaking within a period of four weeks from today.
s.b. sinha, j.1. the primal question involved in this batch of appeals and the writ petitions is the constitutionality of the consumer protection act, 1986 (hereinafter called "the act").2. civil appeals no. 4613 and 4614 of 1999 filed by vishwabharathi house building cooperative society arise out of a judgment and order dated 18.12.1998 passed by a division bench of the high court of karnataka upholding the vires of the consumer protection act, 1985 (the act). state of karnataka has filed the appeal being c.a. no. 9927 of 1996 against the judgment and order of the karnataka high court questioning certain observations made therein as regards interpretation of section 25 of the act.3. dr. r.d. prabhu and shri. b. krishna bhat and others filed the writ petitions under article 32 of the constitution of india questioning the constitutionality of the said act.4. the contentions raised on behalf of appellants petitioners are as under:(1)(a) the parliament is not empowered to establish hierarchy of courts like the district fora, state commission and the national commission parallel to the hierarchy of courts established under the constitution, namely, district courts, high courts and supreme court in the absence of a suitable amendment made in the constitution of india in terms of article 368 thereof.(b) such hierarchy of consumer courts established under the act would result in conflict of decisions with the hierarchy of courts established under the constitution dealing with similar matters.(2) the parliament having regard to the provisions of articles 323-a & 323-b of the constitution of india could not enact the act by establishing forums which are substitute of the civil courts including the high court.(3) the provisions of the said act strike at the independence of the judiciary.(4) as the act does not contain any provision to transfer a case from one consumer court to another and furthermore the forum and the constitutions having no power to pass interim orders, the functioning thereof is unworkable.(5) the parliament can only establish courts which may deal with special subjects specified therefore but not a court which will run parallel to civil courts.5. before adverting to the question as regard the competence of the parliament to enact the said act, we may notice the history of legislation leading to enactment of the said act.6. the secretary general, united nations submitted draft guidelines for consumer protection to the economic and social council (unesco) in 1983. the general assembly of the united nations upon extensive discussions and negotiations among governments on this scope and content thereof adopted the guidelines which inter alia provide for the following:"taking into account the interests and needs of consumers in all countries, particularly those in developing countries, recognizing that consumers often face imbalances in economic terms, educational level, and bargaining power, and hearing in mind that consumer should have the right of assess to non-hazardous products, as well as the importance of promoting just, equitable and sustainable economic and social development, these guidelines for consumer protection have the following objectives:(a) to assist countries in achieving or maintaining adequate protection for their population as consumers;(b) to facilitate production and distribution patterns responsive to the needs and desires of consumers;(c) to encourage high levels of ethical conduct for those engaged in the production and distribution of goods and services to consumers;(d) to assist countries in curbing abusive business practices by all enterprises at the national and international levels which adversely affect consumers;(e) to facilitate the development of independent consumer groups;(f) to further international cooperation in the field of consumer protection;(g) to encourage the development of market conditions which provide consumers with greater choice at lower prices."7. the framework for the consumer act was provided by a resolution, dated 9-4-1985 of the general assembly of the united nations organisation. this is known as 'consumer protection resolution no. 39/248.' india is a signatory to the said resolution.8. the said act was enacted having regard to aforementioned resolution.9. it seeks to provide for better protection of the interests of consumers and for the said purpose, to make provision for the establishment of consumer councils and other authorities for the settlement of consumer disputes and for matters connected therewith, as would appear from the statement of objects and reasons of the act.10. it further seeks inter alia to promote and protect the rights of consumers such as-(a) the right to be protected against marketing of goods which are hazardous to life and property;(b) the right to be informed about the quality, quantity, potency, purity, standard and price of goods to protect the consumer against unfair trade practices;(c) the right to be assured, wherever possible, access to an authority of goods in competitive prices;(d) the right to be heard and to be assured that consumers interests will receive due consideration at appropriate forums;(e) the right to sell, redressal against unfair trade practices or unscrupulous exploitation of consumers; and(f) right to consumer education.11. the legislative competence of the parliament and the state legislatures respectively to provide for creation of courts and tribunals as envisaged in different lists contained in the viith schedule of the constitution of india are as under:item 77 of list 1 of the seventh schedule:constitution, organization, jurisdiction and powers of the supreme court (including contempt of such court), and the fees taken therein, persons entitled to practise before the supreme court.item 78 of list i of the seventh schedule.constitution and organization (including vacations) of the high courts except provisions as to officers and servants of high courts: persons entitled to practise before the high courts.item 79 of list of the seventh schedule:extension of the jurisdiction of a high court to, and (sic) of the jurisdiction of a high court from, any union territory.item 95 of list i of the seventh schedule:jurisdiction and powers of all courts except the supreme court, with respect to any of the matters in this list; admiralty jurisdiction.item 11a of list iii of the seventh schedule:administration of justice; constitution and organisation of all courts, except the supreme court and the high courts.item 46 of list iii of the seventy schedule:jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the supreme court, with respect to any of the matters in this list.12. a bare perusal of the aforementioned provisions does not leave any manner of doubt as regard the legislative competence of parliament to provide for creation of special courts and tribunals. administration of justice; constitution and organization of all courts, except the supreme court and the high courts is squarely covered by entry 11a of list iii of the constitution of india. the said entry was originally a part of entry 3 of list ii. by reason of constitution (forty-second amendment) act, 1976 and by section 57(a)(vi) thereof it was inserted into list iii as item 11a.13. by virtue of clause 2 of article 246 of the constitution, the parliament has the requisite power to make laws with respect of constitution of organization of all courts except the supreme court and the high court.14. the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners could not seriously dispute the plenary power of the parliament to make a law as regard constitution of courts but as noticed, supra, merely urged that it did not have the competence to create parallel civil courts.15. the said submission has been made purported to be relying on or on the basis of the following observations made by shinghal, j. while delivering a partially dissenting judgment in in re: the special courts bill, 1978 reported in manu/sc/0039/1978manu/sc/0039/1978 : [1979]2scr476 :"the constitution has thus made ample and effective provision for the establishment of a strong, independent and impartial judicial administration in the country, with the necessary complement of civil and criminal courts. it is not permissible for parliament or a state legislature to ignore or bypass that scheme of the constitution by providing for the establishment of a civil or criminal court parallel to a high court in a state, or by way of an additional or extra or a second high court, or a court other than a court subordinate to the high court. any such attempt would be unconstitutional and will strike at the independence of the judiciary which has so nobly been enshrined in the constitution and so carefully nursed over the years."16. the argument of the learned counsel is fallacious inasmuch as the provisions of the said act in addition to the provisions of any other law for the time being in force and not in derogation thereof as is evident from section 3 thereof.17. the provisions of the said act clearly demonstrate that it was enacted keeping in view the long felt necessity of protecting the common man from wrongs where for the ordinary law for all intent and purport had become illusory. in terms of the said act, a consumer is entitled to participate in the proceedings directly as a result whereof his helplessness against a powerful business house may be taken care of18. this court in a large number of decisions considered the purport and object of the said act. by reason of the said statute quasi-judicial authorities have been created at the district, state and central levels so as to enable a consumer to ventilate his grievances before a forum where justice can be done without any procedural wrangles and hyper-technicalities.19. one of the objects of the said act is to provide momentum to the consumer movement. central consumer protection council is also to be constituted in terms of section 4 of the act to promote and protect the rights of the consumers as noticed hereinbefore.20. before proceeding further to advert to the questions raised herein, it is necessary to consider some of the provisions of the said act.21. section 2 is the interpretation clause. some of the provisions contained therein defining the meaning of words relevant for this case are as under:(b) "complainant" means,-(i) a consumer; or(ii) any voluntary consumer association registered under the companies act, 1956 or under any other law for the time being in force; or(iii) the central government or any state government, who or which makes a complaint;(iv) one or more consumers where there are numerous consumers having the same interest.(c) "complaint" means any allegation in writing made by a complainant that,-(i) an unfair trade practice or a restrictive trade practice has been adopted by any trader;(ii) the goods bought by him or agreed to be bought by him suffer from one or more defects;(iii) the services hired or availed of or agreed to be hired or availed of by him suffer from deficiency in any respect;(iv) a trader has charged for the goods mentioned in the complaint a price in excess of the price fixed by or under any law for the time being in force or displayed on the goods or any package containing such goods;(v) goods which will be hazardous to life and safety when used, are being offered for sale to the public in contravention of the provisions of any law for the time being in force requiring traders to display information in regard to the contents, manner and effect of use of such goods;with a view of obtaining any relief provided by or under this act;(d) "consumer" means any person who-(i) buys any goods for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid and partly promised or under any system of deferred payment and includes any user of such goods other than the person who buys such goods for consideration paid or promised or partly paid or partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment when such use is made with the approval of such person, but does not include a person who obtains such goods for resale or for any commercial purpose; or(ii) hires or avails of any services for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any beneficiary of such services other than the person who hires or avails of the services for consideration paid or promised, or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment, when such services are availed of with the approval of the first mentioned person;explanation:- for the purposes of sub-clause (i) "commercial purpose" does not include use by a consumer of goods bought and use by him exclusively for the purpose of earning his livelihood, by means of self-employment";(e) "consumer dispute" means a dispute where the person against whom a complaint has been made, denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint;(g) "deficiency" means any fault, imperfection, short coming or inadequacy in the quality, nature and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or under any law for the time being in force or has been undertaken to be performed by a person in pursuance of a contract or otherwise in relation to any service;(r) "unfair trade practice" means a trade practice which, for the purpose of promoting the sale, use or supply of any goods or for the provisions of any service, adopts any unfair method or unfair or deceptive practice including any of the following practices, namely;(1) .....(2) .....22. section 7 of the said act provides for constitution of state consumer protection councils to promote and protect within the state the rights of the consumer with the objects ad quoted supra.23. section 9 provides for establishment of consumer disputes redressal agencies. a consumer disputes redressal forum to be known as "district forum" will be established by the state government in each district. a consumer disputes redressal commission to be known as "state commission" will be established by the state government in the state and a national consumer disputes redressal commission by the central council.24. in terms of section 10, the president of a district forum shall be a person who is, or has been, or is qualified to be a district judge and the forum shall also consist of two other members who are required to be persons of ability, integrity and standing and have adequate knowledge or experience of, or have shown capacity in dealing with, problems relating to economic, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public affairs or administration and one of them shall be a woman. the tenure of the members of the district forum is fixed.25. section 13 of the said act lays down a detailed procedure as regards the mode and manner in which the complaints received by the district forum are required to be dealt with section 14 provides for the directions which can be issued by the district forum on arriving at a satisfaction that the goods complained against suffer from any of the defects specified in the complaint or that any of the allegations contained in the complaint about the deficiencies in services have been proved.26. section 15 provides for an appeal from the order made by the district forum to the state commission.section 16 provides for composition of the state commission which reads thus:(1) each state commission shall consist of-(a) a person who is or has been a judge of high court, appointed by the state government who shall be its president:provided that no appointment under this clause shall be made except after consultation with the chief justice of the high court.(b) two other members, who shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing and have adequate knowledge or experience of, or have shown capacity in dealing with, problems relating to economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry; public affairs or administration, one of whom shall be a woman;provided that every appointment under this clause shall be made by the state government on the recommendation of a selection committee consisting of the following namely:(2) the salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the members of the state commission shall be such as may be prescribed by the state government;(3) every member of the state commission shall hold office for a term of five years or up to the age of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier and shall not be eligible for reappointment.(4) notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), a person appointed as a president or as a member before the commencement of the consumer protection (amendment) act, 1993, shall continue to hold such office as president or member, as the case may be, till the completion of his term.the members of the state commission are to be selected by a selection committee, the chairman whereof would be the president of the state commission.27. section 19 provides for an appeal from a decision of the state commission to the national commission. section 20 deals with the composition of national commission, the president whereof would be a person who is or has been a judge of the supreme court and such appointment shall be made only upon consultation with the chief justice of india. so far as the members of the national commission are concerned, the same are also to be made on the recommendation of the selection committee, the chairman whereof would be a person who is a judge of the supreme court to be nominated by the chief justice of india. the tenure of the office of the national commission is also fixed by reason of sub-section (3) of section 20.28. by reason of the provisions of the said act, therefore, independent authorities have been created.29. sections 15, 19 and 23 provide for the hierarchy of appeals. by reason of sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) of section 13 the district forum shall have the same powers as are vested in the civil courts for the purposes mentioned therein. sub-sections (2) and (2-a) of section 14 mandate that the proceedings shall be conducted by the president of the district forum and at least one member thereof sitting together. only in the event of any difference between them on any point or points, the same is to be referred to the other member for hearing thereon and the opinion of the majority shall be the order of the district forum. by reason of section 18, the provisions of sections 12, 13 and 14 and the rules made thereunder would mutatis mutandis be applicable to the disposal of disputes by the state commission.30. section 23 provides for a limited appeal to the supreme ?court from an order made by the national commission i.e., when the same is made in exercise of its original power as conferred by sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of section 21.31. section 25 provides for the enforcement of the orders by the district forum, state commission or the national commission which is in the following terms:enforcement of orders by the district forum, the state commission or the national commission:- every order made by the district forum, the state commission or the national commission may be enforced by the district forum, the state commission or the national commission, as the case may be, in the same manner as if it were a decree or order made by a court in a suit pending therein and it shall be lawful for the district forum, the state commission or the national commission to send, in the event of its inability to execute it, such order to the court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction,-.....and thereupon the court to which the order is so sent, shall execute the order as if it were a decree or order sent to it for execution.32. section 26 empowers the district forum, the state commission or as the case may be the national commission to dismiss the complaint and make an order that the complainant shall pay to the opposite party such costs not exceeding rs. 10,000/- in the event it is found that the complaint was frivolous or vexatious one.33. section 27 provides for penalties.34. in view of the constitutional scheme relating to legislative competence of the parliament and state legislature there cannot be any doubt or dispute that the parliament has the requisite legislative competence to enact the said act.35. the question as regard legislative competence of the parliament to create such special tribunals as also the effect of article 323-a and 323-b of the constitution is no longer res integra having regard to the recent decision of this court in union of india and anr. v. delhi high court bar association and ors., wherein it was held:"9. we will first deal with the question as to whether parliament has the competence to enact a law for establishing such banking tribunals. in order to examine the question of the competence of parliament to enact such a law, it is pertinent to bear in mind the observations of this court in navinchandra mafatlal v. cit, scr manu/sc/0070/1954manu/sc/0070/1954 : [1954]26itr758(sc) at p. 836 which are as follows:as pointed out by gwyer, c.j. in united provinces v. atiqa begum manu/fe/0003/1940manu/fe/0003/1940 at p. 134 none of the items in the lists is to be read in a narrow or restricted sense and that each general word should be held to extend to all ancillary, on subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably be said to be comprehended in it. it is, therefore, clear - and it is acknowledged by chief justice chagla - that in construing an entry in a list conferring legislative powers the widest possible construction according to their ordinary meaning must be put upon the words used therein..... the cardinal rule of interpretation, however, is that words should be read in their ordinary, natural and grammatical meaning subject to this rider that in construing words in a constitutional enactment conferring legislative power the most liberal construction should be put upon the words so that the same may have effect in their widest amplitude.(emphasis added)10. again in union of india v. harbhajan singh dhillon scr manu/sc/0062/1971manu/sc/0062/1971 : [1972]83itr582(sc) at p. 51 it was observed as follows:21. it seems to us that the function of article 246(1), read with entries 1-96 list i, is to give positive power to parliament to legislate in respect of these entries. object is not to debar parliament from legislating on a matter, even if other provisions of the constitution enable it to do so.11. in dhillon decision it was held that what one has to ask is whether the matter sought to be legislated is included in list ii or in list iii and no question has to be asked about list i. if the answer is in the negative, then it follows that parliament has power to make laws with respect to that matter or text.12. it has thus been clearly enunciated that the power of parliament to enact a law, which is not covered by an entry in list ii and list iii, is absolute. while articles 323-a and 323-b specifically enable the legislatures to enact laws for the establishment of tribunals in relation to the matter specified therein, the power of parliament to enact a law constituting a tribunal, like the banking tribunal, which is not covered by any of the matters specified in article 323-a or 323-b, is not taken away. with regard to any of the entries specified in list i, the exclusive jurisdiction to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list i is with parliament. the power conferred by article 246(1) can be exercised notwithstanding the existence of article 323-a or 323-b of the constitution.13. articles 323-a and 323-b are enabling provisions which specifically enable the setting up of tribunals contemplated by the said articles. these articles, however, cannot be interpreted to mean that they prohibit the legislature from establishing tribunals not covered by these articles, as long as there is legislative competence under an appropriate entry in the seventh schedule. articles 323-a and 323-b do not take away that legislative competence. the contrary view expressed by the karnataka high court in d.k. abdul khader case does not lay down the correct law and we expressly disapprove of the same."36. once it is held that the parliament had the legislative competence to enact the said act, the submissions of the learned counsel that the relevant provisions of the constitution required amendments must be neglected.37. the scope and object of the said legislation came up for consideration before this court in common cause, a registered society v. union of india manu/sc/0362/1997manu/sc/0362/1997 : 1997crilj195 . it was held:"the object of the legislation, as the preamble of the act proclaims, is "for better protection of the interests of consumers". during, the last few years proceeding the enactment there was in this country a marked awareness among the consumers of goods that they were not getting their money's worth and were being exploited by both traders and manufacturers of consumer goods. the need for consumer redressal fora was, therefore, increasingly felt. understandably, therefore, legislation was introduced and enacted with considerable enthusiasm and fanfare as a path-breaking benevolent legislation intended to protect the consumer from exploitation by unscrupulous manufacturers and traders of consumer goods. a three-tier fora comprising the district forum, the state commission and the national commission came to be envisaged under the act for redressal of grievances of consumers".38. the rights of the parties have adequately been safeguarded by reason of the provisions of the said act inasmuch as although it provides for an alternative system of consumer jurisdiction on summary trial, they are required to arrive at a conclusion based on reasons. even when quantifying damages, they are required to make an attempt to serve the ends of justice aiming not only at recompensing the individual but also to bring about a qualitative change in the attitude of the service provider. assignment of reason excludes or at any rate minimizes the chances of arbitrariness and the higher forums created under the act can test the correctness thereof.39. the district forum, the state commission and the national commission are not manned by lay persons. the president would be a person having judicial background and other members are required to have the expertise in the subject such as economics, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, public affairs, administration etc. it may be true that by reason of sub-section (2-a) of section 14 of the act, in a case of different of opinion between two members, the matter has to be referred to a third member and, in rare cases, the majority opinion of the members may prevail over the president. but, such eventuality alone is insufficient for striking down the act as unconstitutional, particularly, when provisions have been made therein for appeal there against to a higher forum.40. by reason of the provisions of the said act, the power of judicial review of the high court, which is a basic feature of the constitution, has not been nor could be taken away.41. we may in this connection also notice that in laxmi engineering works v. p.s.g. industrial institute manu/sc/0271/1995manu/sc/0271/1995 : [1995]3scr174 , this court held:"a review of the provisions of the act discloses that the quasi-judicial bodies authorities agencies created by the act known as district forums, state commission and the national commission are not courts though invested with some of the powers of a civil court. they are quasi-judicial tribunals brought into existence to render inexpensive and speedy remedies to consumers. it is equally clear that these forums/commissions were not supposed to supplant but supplement the existing judicial system. the idea was to provide an additional forum providing inexpensive and speedy resolution of disputes arising between consumers and suppliers of goods and services. the forum so created is uninhibited by the requirement of court fee or the formal procedures of a court. any consumer can go and file a complaint. complaint need not necessarily be filed by the complainant himself; and recognized consumers' association can espouse his cause. where a large number of consumers have a similar complaint, one or more can file a complaint on behalf of all. even the central government and state government can act on his their behalf. the idea was to help the consumers get justice and fair treatment in the matter of goods and services purchased and availed by them in a market dominated by large trading and manufacturing bodies. indeed, the entire act revolves round the consumer and is designed to protected his interest. the act provides for "business-to-consumer" disputes and not for "business-to business" disputes. this scheme of the act in our opinion, is relevant to and helps in interpreting the words that fall for consideration in this appeal".42. in charan singh v. healing touch hospital and ors. manu/sc/0588/2000manu/sc/0588/2000 : air2000sc3138 this court observed:"11. the consumer protection act is one of the benevolent pieces of legislation intended to protect a large body of consumers from exploitation. the act provides for an alternative system of consumer justice by summary trial. the authorities under the act exercise quasi-judicial powers for redressal of consumer disputes and it is one of the postulates of such a body that it should arrive at a conclusion based on reason. the necessity to provide reasons, howsoever, brief in support of its conclusion by such a forum, is too obvious to be reiterated and needs no emphasizing. obligation to give reasons not only introduces clarity but it also excludes, or at any rate minimizes, the chances of arbitrariness and the higher forum can test the correctness of those reasons. unfortunately we have not been able to (sic) from the impugned order any reasons in support of the conclusion that the claim of the appellant is "unrealistic" or "exaggerated" or "excessive". loss of salary is not the sole factor which was required to be taken into consideration.12. while quantifying damages, consumer forums are required to make an attempt to serve the ends of justice so that compensation is awarded, in an established case, which not only serves the purpose of recompensing the individual but which also at the same time, aims to bring about a qualitative change in the attitude of the service provider. indeed, calculation of damages depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. no hard and fast rule can be laid down for universal application. while awarding compensation, a consumer forum has to take into account all relevant factors and assess compensation on the basis of accepted legal principles, on moderation. it is for the consumer forum to grant compensation to the extent it finds it reasonable, fair and proper in the facts and circumstances of a given case according to the established judicial standards where the claimant is able to establish his charge."43. in lucknow development authority v. m.k. gupta manu/sc/0178/1994manu/sc/0178/1994 : air1994sc787 this court held:"the importance of the act lies in promoting welfare of the society by enabling the consumer to participate directly in the market economy. it attempts to remove the helplessness of a consumer which he faces against powerful business, described as 'a network of rackets' or a society in which, 'producers have secured power' to 'rob the rest' and the might of public bodies which are degenerating into store house of inaction where papers do not move from one desk to another as a matter of duty and responsibility but for extraneous consideration leaving the common man helpless, bewildered and shocked."it has further been held:"the act thus aims to protect the economic interest of a consumer as understood in commercial sense as a purchaser of goods and in the larger sense of user of service..... it is a milestone in history of socio-economic legislation and is directed towards achieving public benefit."44. yet again in indian medical assocn. v. v.p. shantha manu/sc/0836/1995manu/sc/0836/1995 : air1996sc550 this court held:".....it is no doubt true that the decisions of the district forum as well as the state commission and the national commission have to be taken by majority and it may be possible in some cases that the president may be in minority. but the presence of a person well versed in law as the president will have a bearing on the deliberations of these agencies and their decisions. as regards the absence of requirement about a member having adequate knowledge or experience in dealing with the problems relating to medicine it may be stated that the persons to be chosen as members are required to have knowledge and experience in dealing with problems relating to various fields connected with the object and purpose of the act, viz., protection and interest of the consumers. the said knowledge and experience would enable them to handle the consumer disputes coming up before them for settlement in consonance with the requirement of the act. to say that the members must have adequate knowledge or experience in the field to which the goods or services, in respect of which the complaint is made, are related would lead to impossible situations."[see also dr. j.j. merchant and ors. v. shrinath chaturvedi manu/sc/0668/2002manu/sc/0668/2002 : [2002]supp1scr469 and synco industries v. state bank of bikaner & jaipur and ors. manu/sc/0024/2002manu/sc/0024/2002 : [2002]1scr225 ].45. by reason of the provisions of section 3 of the act, it is evident that remedies provided thereunder are not in derogation of those provided under other laws. the said act supplement and not supplants the jurisdiction of the civil courts or other statutory authorities.46. the said act provides for a further safeguard to the effect that in the event a complaint involves complicated issues requiring recording of evidence of experts, the complainant would be at liberty approach the civil court for appropriate relief. the right of the consumer to approach the civil court for necessary relief has, therefore, been provided under the act itself.47. the provisions of the said act are required to be interpreted as broadly as possible. it has jurisdiction to entertain a complaint despite the fact that the other forums/courts would also have jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the lis. (see fait air engineers v. n.k. modi manu/sc/0141/1997manu/sc/0141/1997 : air1997sc533 and satpal mohindra v. surindra timber stores manu/sc/0961/1999manu/sc/0961/1999 : (1999)5scc696 .48. the question as regards the applicability or otherwise of article 323-a and 323-b of the constitution in the matter of constitution of such tribunals came up for consideration before this court in l. chandra kumar v. union of india and ors. manu/sc/0261/1997manu/sc/0261/1997 : [1997]228itr725(sc) . this court therein clearly held that the constitutional provisions vest parliament and the state legislatures, as the case may be, with powers to divest the traditional courts of a considerable portion of their judicial work. it was observed that the parliament and the state legislatures possess legislative competence to effect changes in the original jurisdiction of the supreme court and high court apart from the authorization that flows from article 323-a and 323-b in terms of entries 77, 78, 79 and 95 of list i so far as the parliament is concerned and in terms of entry 65 of list ii and entry 46 of list iii so far as the state legislatures are concerned. it was further held that power of judicial review being the basic structure of the constitution cannot be taken away.49. we, therefore, are clearly of the opinion that the said act cannot be said to be unconstitutional.50. it may be true that there does not exist any provision for transfer of case from one forum to the other or there does not exist any provision to grant injunction. absence of such provisions in our opinion would not render the statute ultra vires the constitution or unworkable.51. the very fact that in a given case a party under the said act may approach upto this court and or may otherwise take recourse to the remedy of judicial review, the interest of the parties must be held to have been sufficient safeguard.52. the provisions relating to power to approach appellate court by a party aggrieved by a decision of the forums state commissions as also the power of high court and thus court under article 226/227 of the constitution of india and article 32 of this court apart from section 23 of the act provide for adequate safeguards. furthermore, primarily the jurisdiction of the forum/commissions is to grant damages. in the event, a complainant feels that he will have a better and effective remedy in a civil court as he may have to seek for an order of injunction, he indisputably may file a suit in an appropriate civil court or may take recourse to some other remedies as provided for in other statutes.53. we, therefore, agree with the judgment of the karnataka high court.54. however, we are not in a position to agree with the observations of the high court as regard the interpretation of section 25 of the act.55. the high court interpreting the said provision has made the following observations, which is impugned herein in civil appeal no. 9927 of 1996:"on reading section 25 of the act, in our view, it does not empower the district forum to pass such an order. if at all the forum wants to enforce the order, it has to send the order to the concerned court which has jurisdiction over the area, which is not done here. so, without entering into the other points raised in this, in our view, it suffices to set aside the impugned order as annexure 'd' accordingly."56. a bare perusal of the section 25 of the act clearly shows that thereby a legal fiction has been created to the effect that an order made by district forum state commission or national commission will be deemed to be a decree or order made by a civil court in a suit. legal fiction so created has a specific purpose, i.e., for the purpose of execution of the order passed by the forum or commission. only in the event the forum state commission or the national commission is unable to execute its order, the same may be sent to the civil court for its execution. the high court, therefore was not correct to hold that in each and every case the order passed by the district forum/state commission/national commission are required to be sent to the civil courts for execution thereof.57. furthermore, section 27 of the act also confers an additional power upon the forum and the commission to execute its order. the said provision is akin to order 39 rule 2-a of the code of civil procedure or the provisions of the contempt of courts act or section 51 read with ordered 21 rule 37 of the code of civil procedure. section 25 should be read in conjunction with section 27. a parliamentary statute indisputably can create a tribunal and might say that non-compliance of its order would be punishable by way of imprisonment of fine, which can be in addition to any other mode or recover.58. it is well settled that the cardinal principle of interpretation of statute is that courts or tribunals must be held to possess power to execute their own order.59. it is also well settled that a statutory tribunal which has been conferred with the power to adjudicate a dispute and pass necessary order has also the power to implement its order. further, the act which is a self-contained code, even if it has not been specifically spelt out, must be deemed to have conferred upon the tribunal all powers in order to make its order effective.60. in savitri v. gobind singh rawat manu/sc/0104/1985manu/sc/0104/1985 : 1986crilj41 , it has been held as follows:-".....every court must be deemed to possess by necessary intendment all such powers as are necessary to make its orders effective. this principle is embodied in the maxim (sic) aliquid conceditur, conceditur ed id since quo res ipsa isse non potest" (where anything is conceded, there is conceded also anything without which the thing itself cannot exist) (vide earl jowitt's dictionary of english law, 1959 edn., p. 1797). whenever anything is required to be done by law and it is found impossible to do that thing unless something not authorised in express (sic) be also done then something else will be supplied by necessary intendment. such a construction though it may not always be admissible in the present case however would advance the object of the legislation under consideration. a contrary view is likely to result in grave hardship to the applicant, who may have no means to subsist until the final order is passed. there is no room for the apprehension that the recognition of such implied power would lead to the passing of interim orders in a large number of cases where the liability to pay maintenance may not exist. it is quite possible that such contingency may arise in a few cases but the prejudice caused thereby to the person against whom it is made is minimal as it can be set right quickly after hearing both the parties....."61. in arabind das v. state of assam and ors. manu/gh/0006/1981manu/gh/0006/1981, it has been held as follows:-"we are of firm opinion that where a statute gives a power, such power implies that all legitimate steps may be taken to exercise that power even though these steps may not be clearly spelt in the statute. where the rule making authority gives power to certain authority to do anything of public character, such authority should get the power to take intermediate steps in order to give effect to the exercise of the power in its final step, otherwise the ultimate power would become illusory, ridiculous and inoperative which could not be the intention of the rule making authority.in determining whether a power claimed by the statutory authority can be held to be incidental or ancillary to the powers expressly conferred by the statute, the court must not only see whether the power may be derived by reasonable implication from the provisions of the statute, but also whether such powers are necessary for carrying out the purpose of the provisions of the statute which confers power on the authority in its exercise of such power."62. the terminology used in section 25 of the act to the effect "in the event of its inability to execute it" is of great significance. section 25, on a plain reading, goes to show that the provision contained therein presuppose that the forum or the commission would be entitled to execute its order. it however, may send the matter for its execution to a court only in the event it is unable to do so. such a contingency may arise only in a given situation but in our considered opinion the same does not lead to the conclusion that the consumer courts cannot execute its own order and by compulsion it has to send all its orders for execution to the civil courts. such construction of section 25 in our opinion would violate the plain language used therein and thus, must be held to be untenable.63. it is now well settled principle of interpretation of statute that plain language employed in a section must be given its ordinary meaning.64. for the reasons aforesaid in writ petition 417 of 1996, writ petition 12 of 2002 civil appeal 4613 and civil appeal 4614 of 1999 are dismissed and civil appeal 9927 of 1996 is allowed. in the facts and circumstances of this case, however, there shall be no order as to costs.
r. banumathi, j.1. leave granted.2. this appeal by special leave arises out of the order dated 20.02.2013 passed by the high court of judicature at patna in lpa no. 1312 of 2012 which was dismissed in limine by the high court, whereby the order of the learned single judge was confirmed observing that the appointment of the appellant as daily wages was not by the competent authority and that he is not entitled for regularization.3. brief facts which led to the filing of this appeal are as follows: the appellant was appointed temporarily in class iv post of night guard, on daily wages vide office order dated 04.06.1983 issued by principal, ramashray baleshwar college (for short "college"), dalsang sarai, affiliated to lalit narayan mithila university(for short "university"), bihar. the university vide letter dated 04.07.1985 took a decision to regularize the persons who worked for more than 240 days, and as per the letter dated 30.03.1987, as per which employees who have been working for a period for more than one year need to be regularized. thereafter, the additional commissioner-cum-secretary, bihar passed a settlement dated 11.07.1989 and forwarded a copy of the same to the vice chancellors of the universities, wherein it was stated that the services of employees working in educational institutions as per the staff pattern, can be regularized, further imposing a condition that new appointments against the vacancies present and in future should not at all be done. principal, ramashray baleshwar college requested the registrar of the university to regularize the services of appellant vide letter dated 07.10.1993; but the registrar passed an order of termination dated 01.03.2001. a writ petition no. 9809/1998 was preferred by few similarly placed daily wagers in the high court. as per the directions issued by the high court, the registrar of the university vide letter dated 22.12.2001 allowed all the daily wagers to resume their jobs from 03.01.2002 and the appellant also joined his duties.4. the principal of the college again vide letters dated 08.01.2002 and 12.07.2004 recommended for absorption of the appellant against the two vacant posts. in pursuance of the high court order in cwjc no. 5774/2000, he was given opportunity to appear before the three members committee constituted by the vice-chancellor for consideration of his claim for regularization of services, but the same was rejected as it was not in consonance with the recruitment rules laid down by the constitution bench judgment in secretary, state of karnataka and ors. v. umadevi and ors. manu/sc/1918/2006manu/sc/1918/2006 : (2006) 4 scc 1 and the same was informed to the appellant by the registrar vide letter dated 25.11.2007. appellant approached the high court by way of writ petition (civil) no. 545/2009 and the same was dismissed vide order dated 26.8.2011 observing that it is a clear case of violation of section 10(6) and section 35 of the bihar state universities act, 1976 and there is no illegality in the order passed by the three members committee. aggrieved by it, the appellant preferred lpa no. 1312/2012 which was dismissed in limine confirming the order dated 26.08.2011. in this appeal, the appellant seeks to assail the above order.5. learned counsel for the appellant contended that the appellant served on the post for 29 years on daily wages and even as per the decision in para 53 in umadevi's case (supra), irregular appointment of employees who have worked for more than 10 years should be considered on merits. it was contended that the appellant has been working in a sanctioned post and his appointment was not illegal but in the facts and circumstances of the case, his appointment could only be irregular appointment entitling him for regularization. it was submitted that three members committee as well as the high court did not keep in view that the case of the appellant was recommended for regularization.6. per contra, learned counsel for respondents no. 1 to 3 contended that principal of the college has no authority to make any appointment on any post on daily wages as per the legislative scheme under section 10(6) of bihar state universities act, 1976. it was submitted that three members committee scrutinized the documents available on record and rejected claim of the appellant for regularization and the high court rightly dismissed the claim of the appellant for regularization.7. reiterating the submission, learned counsel for respondent nos. 4 to 6 submitted that a principal of the college was not empowered under the universities laws to make appointment to class iii or class iv and that the appellant was not appointed against any sanctioned post and therefore he cannot seek for regularization.8. we have carefully considered the rival contentions and also perused the impugned order and material on record.9. insofar as contention of the respondent that the appointment of the appellant was made by the principal who is not a competent authority to make such appointment and is in violation of the bihar state universities act and hence the appointment is illegal appointment, it is pertinent to note that the appointment of the appellant as night guard was done out of necessity and concern for the college. as noticed earlier, the principal of the college vide letters dated 11.03.1988, 07.10.1993, 08.01.2002 and 12.07.2004 recommended the case of the appellant for regularization on the post of night guard and the university was thus well acquainted with the appointment of the appellant by the then principal even though principal was not a competent authority to make such appointments and thus the appointment of the appellant and other employees was brought to the notice of the university in 1988. in spite of that, the process for termination was initiated only in the year 2001 and the appellant was reinstated w.e.f. 3.01.2002 and was removed from services finally in the year 2007. as rightly contended by the learned counsel for the appellant, for a considerable time, university never raised the issue that the appointment of the appellant by the principal is ultra vires the rules of bsu act. having regard to the various communications between the principal and the university and also the education authorities and the facts of the case, in our view, the appointment of the appellant cannot be termed to be illegal, but it can only be termed as irregular.10. human resources development, department of bihar government, vide its letter dated 11.07.1989 intimated to the registrar of all the colleges that as per the settlement dated 26.04.1989 held between bihar state university and college employees federation and the government it was agreed that the services of the employees working in the education institutions on the basis of prescribed staffing pattern are to be regularized. as per sanctioned staffing pattern, in ramashray baleshwar college, there were two vacant posts of class iv employees and the appellant was appointed against the same. further, resolution no. 989 dated 10.05.1991 issued by the human resources development department provides that employees working upto 10.5.1986 shall be adjusted against the vacancies arising in future. although, the appellant was appointed in 1983 temporarily on the post that was not sanctioned by the state government, as per the above communication of human resources development department, it is evident that the state government issued orders to regularise the services of the employees who worked upto 10.5.1986. in our considered view, the high court ought to have examined the case of the appellant in the light of the various communications issued by the state government and in the light of the circular, the appellant is eligible for consideration for regularization.11. as noticed earlier, the case of the appellant was referred to three members committee and three members committee rejected the claim of the appellant declaring that his appointment is not in consonance with the ratio of the decision laid down by this court in umadevi's case (supra). in umadevi's case, even though this court has held that the appointments made against temporary or ad-hoc are not to be regularized, in para 53 of the judgment, it provided that irregular appointment of duly qualified persons in duly sanctioned posts who have worked for 10 years or more can be considered on merits and steps to be taken one time measure to regularize them. in para 53, the court observed as under:53. one aspect needs to be clarified. there may be cases where irregular appointments (not illegal appointments) as explained in s.v. narayanappa, r.n. nanjundappa and b.n. nagarajan and referred to in para 15 above, of duly qualified persons in duly sanctioned vacant posts might have been made and the employees have continued to work for ten years or more but without the intervention of orders of the courts or of tribunals. the question of regularisation of the services of such employees may have to be considered on merits in the light of the principles settled by this court in the cases above referred to and in the light of this judgment. in that context, the union of india, the state governments and their instrumentalities should take steps to regularise as a one-time measure, the services of such irregularly appointed, who have worked for ten years or more in duly sanctioned posts but not under cover of orders of the courts or of tribunals and should further ensure that regular recruitments are undertaken to fill those vacant sanctioned posts that require to be filled up, in cases where temporary employees or daily wagers are being now employed. the process must be set in motion within six months from this date. we also clarify that regularisation, if any already made, but not sub judice, need not be reopened based on this judgment, but there should be no further bypassing of the constitutional requirement and regularising or making permanent, those not duly appointed as per the constitutional scheme.the objective behind the exception carved out in this case was prohibiting regularization of such appointments, appointed persons whose appointments is irregular but not illegal, ensure security of employment of those persons who served the state government and their instrumentalities for more than ten years.12. elaborating upon the principles laid down in umadevi's case (supra) and explaining the difference between irregular and illegal appointments in state of karnataka and ors. v. m.l. kesari and ors. manu/sc/0557/2010manu/sc/0557/2010 : (2010) 9 scc 247, this court held as under:7. it is evident from the above that there is an exception to the general principles against "regularisation" enunciated in umadevi manu/sc/1918/2006manu/sc/1918/2006 : (2006) 4 scc 1, if the following conditions are fulfilled:(i) the employee concerned should have worked for 10 years or more in duly sanctioned post without the benefit or protection of the interim order of any court or tribunal. in other words, the state government or its instrumentality should have employed the employee and continued him in service voluntarily and continuously for more than ten years.(ii) the appointment of such employee should not be illegal, even if irregular. where the appointments are not made or continued against sanctioned posts or where the persons appointed do not possess the prescribed minimum qualifications, the appointments will be considered to be illegal. but where the person employed possessed the prescribed qualifications and was working against sanctioned posts, but had been selected without undergoing the process of open competitive selection, such appointments are considered to be irregular.13. applying the ratio of umadevi's case, this court in nihal singh and ors. v. state of punjab and ors. manu/sc/0780/2013manu/sc/0780/2013 : (2013) 14 scc 65 directed the absorption of the special police officers in the services of the state of punjab holding as under:35. therefore, it is clear that the existence of the need for creation of the posts is a relevant factor with reference to which the executive government is required to take rational decision based on relevant consideration. in our opinion, when the facts such as the ones obtaining in the instant case demonstrate that there is need for the creation of posts, the failure of the executive government to apply its mind and take a decision to create posts or stop extracting work from persons such as the appellants herein for decades together itself would be arbitrary action (inaction) on the part of the state.36. the other factor which the state is required to keep in mind while creating or abolishing posts is the financial implications involved in such a decision. the creation of posts necessarily means additional financial burden on the exchequer of the state. depending upon the priorities of the state, the allocation of the finances is no doubt exclusively within the domain of the legislature. however in the instant case creation of new posts would not create any additional financial burden to the state as the various banks at whose disposal the services of each of the appellants is made available have agreed to bear the burden. if absorbing the appellants into the services of the state and providing benefits on a par with the police officers of similar rank employed by the state results in further financial commitment it is always open for the state to demand the banks to meet such additional burden. apparently no such demand has ever been made by the state. the result is--the various banks which avail the services of these appellants enjoy the supply of cheap labour over a period of decades. it is also pertinent to notice that these banks are public sector banks.14. in our view, the exception carved out in para 53 of umadevi is applicable to the facts of the present case. there is no material placed on record by the respondents that the appellant has been lacking any qualification or bear any blemish record during his employment for over two decades. it is pertinent to note that services of similarly situated persons on daily wages for regularization viz. one yatindra kumar mishra who was appointed on daily wages on the post of clerk was regularized w.e.f. 1987. the appellant although initially working against unsanctioned post, the appellant was working continuously since 03.1.2002 against sanctioned post. since there is no material placed on record regarding the details whether any other night guard was appointed against the sanctioned post, in the facts and circumstances of the case, we are inclined to award monetary benefits be paid from 01.01.2010.15. considering the facts and circumstances of the case that the appellant has served the university for more than 29 years on the post of night guard and that he has served the college on daily wages, in the interest of justice, the authorities are directed to regularize the services of the appellant retrospectively w.e.f. 03.01.2002 (the date on which he rejoined the post as per direction of registrar).16. the impugned order of the high court in lpa no. 1312 of 2012 dated 20.02.2013 is set aside and this appeal is allowed. the authorities are directed to notionally regularize the services of the appellant retrospectively w.e.f. 03.01.2002, or the date on which the post became vacant whichever is later and without monetary benefit for the above period. however, the appellant shall be entitled to monetary benefits from 01.01.2010. the period from 03.01.2002 shall be taken for continuity of service and pensionary benefits.17. the appeal is allowed in terms of the above. no order as to costs.
dipak misra, j.1. despite completion of a decade from the date of solemnisation of the marriage and in spite of two off springs in the wedlock, neither the time nor the expansion of family nor the concern for the children could cement the bond or weld the affinity between the appellant-husband and the wife, the 2nd respondent herein, as a consequence of which she was compelled to set the criminal law in motion by lodging fir no. 376 dated 23.11.2013 which was registered for the offences punishable under section 498a/323/34 of the indian penal code (ipc) against the husband and the mother-in-law alleging that the husband was insistent upon getting mutual divorce and on her resistance, he had physically assaulted her and deprived her of basic facilities of life. all these allegations had the foundation in demand of dowry and non-meeting of the same by the family members of wife. after due investigation, the prosecuting agency placed the charge-sheet against the husband alone for the offences punishable under section 498a and 323 indian penal code before the learned judicial magistrate 1st class, gurgaon who eventually vide order dated 04.04.2009 framed charges against the husband for commission of the said offences.2. when the matter was pending before the learned magistrate, an application dated 31.07.2014 under section 216 of the code of criminal procedure (crpc) was filed by the informant-wife for framing an additional charge under section 406 indian penal code against the husband and mother-in-law, renuka sinha. it was stated in the said application that there was an express complaint with regard to misappropriation of the entire stridhan and other articles and hence, the accused persons had committed breach of trust, but no charge-sheet was filed in respect of the said offence. it was contended that in her statement recorded under section 161 code of criminal procedure, she had categorically stated about misappropriation of the stridhan by the family members of her husband. the learned magistrate took note of the materials, namely, stridhan list, complaint addressed to d.c.p. (east), gurgaon, statements recorded under section 161 code of criminal procedure and letter dated 16.11.2013 from women cell, d.c.p. (east), gurgaon and came to hold that in view of the specific allegations regarding misappropriation of her entire stridhan by the husband and the other statements recorded during investigation, a prima facie case for criminal breach of trust was made out and, accordingly, allowed the application under section 216 code of criminal procedure against the husband and the mother-in-law. be it noted, a prayer had been made to add the charge for the offence under section 120b indian penal code also but the same was not accepted by the learned magistrate.3. the order passed by the learned magistrate came to be assailed in criminal revision no. 5 of 2015 before the learned additional sessions judge, gurgaon and it was contended in the revision that the mother-in-law was not charge-sheeted by the police but the trial court had directed to frame the charge against her and, therefore, the whole approach was erroneous. it was also urged that there was no material to make out a prima facie case under section 406 indian penal code against the husband. the stand put forth by the revisionist was combated by the prosecution as well as by the informant on the ground that the trial court has power to add or alter any charge under section 216 code of criminal procedure and, therefore, no exception could be taken to the order passed by the learned magistrate. the revisional court dwelt upon the law pertaining to alteration and addition of charges and came to hold that the framing of the charge against mother-in-law was unsustainable but the framing of additional charge under section 406 indian penal code against the husband, the appellant herein, could not be faulted. being of this view, the revisional court partly allowed the revision petition by setting aside the order of framing of charge against the mother-in-law.4. the defensibility of the aforesaid order was called in question by the husband by preferring a petition under section 482 code of criminal procedure in the high court of punjab and haryana forming the subject matter of crl.m. no. 24510 of 2015. the soundness of the order was attacked by placing reliance on the principles as elucidated in cbi v. karimullah osan khan manu/sc/0167/2014manu/sc/0167/2014 : (2014) 11 scc 538 and hasanbhai valibhai qureshi v. state of gujarat and ors. manu/sc/0302/2004manu/sc/0302/2004 : (2004) 5 scc 347 : (2004) 2 rcr (criminal) 463. as is demonstrable from the impugned order, the learned single judge appreciating the ratio of the aforesaid decisions has opined that the court can exercise power of addition or modification of charge under section 216 code of criminal procedure on the basis of material before the court. the high court has also observed that the trial court has spelt out the reasons that have necessitated for addition of the charge and hence, the impugned order did not warrant any interference. to buttress the view, the high court has drawn support from the authority in jasvinder saini and ors. v. state (government of nct of delhi) manu/sc/0642/2013manu/sc/0642/2013 : (2013) 7 scc 256.5. we have heard mr. amarendra sharan, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant and mr. sanjay kumar visen, learned counsel for the respondent-state.6. it is submitted by mr. sharan, learned senior counsel for the appellant that the high court would have been well within the domain of its jurisdiction in exercise of power under section 482 code of criminal procedure in setting aside the orders passed by the courts below, for the magistrate has no power under section 216 code of criminal procedure to alter or modify the charge on the basis of an application filed by the informant. it is his further submission that the trial court could have altered the charge if some evidence had come on record but not on the basis of the material that was already on record. additionally, it is urged by mr. sharan that materials on record do not remotely attract any of the ingredients of the offence under section 406 code of criminal procedure and, therefore, addition of charge in respect of the said offence is wholly unsound and faulty. it has also been argued by mr. sharan that the charges could not have been added on the basis of an application filed by the informant, for such an application as required in law is to be filed only by the public prosecutor. in support of the aforesaid submissions, he has drawn inspiration from the authorities in harihar chakravarty v. state of west bengal manu/sc/0119/1953manu/sc/0119/1953 : air 1954 sc 266, hasanbhai valibhai qureshi (supra), jasvinder saini and ors. (supra), umesh kumar v. state of andhra pradesh and anr. manu/sc/0904/2013manu/sc/0904/2013 : (2013) 10 scc 591, karimullah osan khan (supra) and orders passed by the high court of punjab and haryana in poonam and anr. v. state of punjab1 and anant sinha v. state of haryana and ors.2.7. mr. visen, learned counsel for the respondent-state, has supported the order passed by the high court and submitted that there is no prohibition under section 216 code of criminal procedure to alter or add a charge prior to the recording of evidence if the court is moved for the said purpose and it is satisfied that charge framed by it deserves to be altered or an additional charge is required to be added. according to him, the order passed by the high court being totally correct and impenetrable, there is no reason to interfere with the same in exercise of jurisdiction under article 136 of the constitution of india. learned counsel would further contend that when the magistrate has jurisdiction to rectify the mistake by adding or altering the charge, he can hear the counsel for the parties and do it suo motu and an application either filed by the public prosecutor or by the informant is only to bring the said facts to his notice and in any case, that would not invalidate the order.8. the controversy as raised rests on two aspects. the first aspect that has emanated for consideration is whether without evidence being adduced another charge could be added. in this context, we may usefully refer to section 216 code of criminal procedure which reads as follows:216. court may alter charge.-(1) any court may alter or add to any charge at any time before judgment is pronounced.(2) every such alteration or addition shall be read and explained to the accused.(3) if the alteration or addition to a charge is such that proceeding immediately with the trial is not likely, in the opinion of the court, to prejudice the accused in his defence or the prosecutor in the conduct of the case, the court may, in its discretion, after such alteration or addition has been made, proceed with the trial as if the altered or added charge had been the original charge.(4) if the alteration or addition is such that proceeding immediately with the trial is likely, in the opinion of the court, to prejudice the accused or the prosecutor as aforesaid, the court may either direct a new trial or adjourn the trial for such period as may be necessary.(5) if the offence stated in the altered or added charge is one for the prosecution of which previous sanction is necessary, the case shall not be proceeded with until such sanction is obtained, unless sanction has been already obtained for a prosecution on the same facts as those on which the altered or added charge is founded.9. the aforesaid provision has been interpreted in hasanbhai valibhai qureshi (supra) wherein the court has observed:section 228 of the code in chapter xvii and section 240 in chapter xix deal with framing of the charge during trial before a court of session and trial of warrant cases by magistrates respectively. there is a scope of alteration of the charge during trial on the basis of materials brought on record. section 216 of the code appearing in chapter xvii clearly stipulates that any court may alter or add to any charge at any time before judgment is pronounced. whenever such alteration or addition is made, the same is to be read out and informed to the accused.10. in the said case, reference was made to kantilal chandulal mehta v. state of maharashtra manu/sc/0111/1969manu/sc/0111/1969 : (1969) 3 scc 166 wherein it has been ruled that code gives ample power to the courts to alter or amend a charge provided that the accused has not to face a charge for a new offence or is not prejudiced either by keeping him in the dark about the charge or in not giving him full opportunity of meeting it and putting forward any defence open to him on the charge finally preferred against him. placing reliance on the said decision, it has been opined that if during trial the trial court on a consideration of broad probabilities of the case based upon total effect of the evidence and documents produced is satisfied that any addition or alteration of the charge is necessary, it is free to do so, and there can be no legal bar to appropriately act as the exigencies of the case warrant or necessitate.11. in jasvinder saini and ors. (supra), the charge-sheet was filed before the jurisdictional magistrate alleging commission of offences under sections 498-a, 304-b, 406 and 34 indian penal code against the appellant nos. 1 to 4 therein. a supplementary charge-sheet was filed in which the appellant nos. 5 to 8 therein were implicated for the case to which section 302 indian penal code was also added by the investigating officer. after the matter was committed to the court of session, the trial court came to the conclusion that there was no evidence or material on record to justify framing of a charge under section 302 indian penal code, as a result of which charges were framed only under sections 498-a, 304-b read with section 34 indian penal code. when the trial court was proceeding with the matter, this court delivered the judgment in rajbir alias raju and anr. v. state of haryana manu/sc/0967/2010manu/sc/0967/2010 : (2010) 15 scc 116 and directed that all the trial courts in india to ordinarily add section 302 to the charge on section 304-b indian penal code so that death sentences could be imposed in heinous and barbaric crimes against women. the trial court noted the direction in rajbir (supra) and being duty-bound, added the charge under section 302 indian penal code to the one already framed against the appellant therein and further for doing so, it placed reliance on section 216 code of criminal procedure. the said order was assailed before the high court which opined that the appearance of evidence at the trial was not essential for framing of an additional charge or altering a charge already framed, though it may be one of the grounds to do so. that apart, the high court referred to the autopsy surgeon which, according to the high court, provided prima facie evidence for framing the charge under section 302 indian penal code. being of this view, it declined to interfere with the order impugned. this court adverting to the facts held thus:it is common ground that a charge under section 304-b indian penal code is not a substitute for a charge of murder punishable under section 302. as in the case of murder in every case under section 304-b also there is a death involved. the question whether it is murder punishable under section 302 indian penal code or a dowry death punishable under section 304-b indian penal code depends upon the fact situation and the evidence in the case. if there is evidence whether direct or circumstantial to prima facie support a charge under section 302 indian penal code the trial court can and indeed ought to frame a charge of murder punishable under section 302 indian penal code, which would then be the main charge and not an alternative charge as is erroneously assumed in some quarters. if the main charge of murder is not proved against the accused at the trial, the court can look into the evidence to determine whether the alternative charge of dowry death punishable under section 304-b is established. the ingredients constituting the two offences are different, thereby demanding appreciation of evidence from the perspective relevant to such ingredients. the trial court in that view of the matter acted mechanically for it framed an additional charge under section 302 indian penal code without adverting to the evidence adduced in the case and simply on the basis of the direction issued in rajbir case. the high court no doubt made a half-hearted attempt to justify the framing of the charge independent of the directions in rajbir case (supra), but it would have been more appropriate to remit the matter back to the trial court for fresh orders rather than lending support to it in the manner done by the high court.12. it is appropriate to note here, the court further observed that the annulment of the order passed by the court would not prevent the trial court from re-examining the question of framing a charge under section 302 indian penal code against the appellant therein and passing an appropriate order if upon a prima facie appraisal of the evidence adduced before it, the trial court comes to the conclusion that there is any room for doing so. in that context, reference was made to hasanbhai valibhai qureshi (supra).13. in karimullah osan khan (supra), the court was concerned with the legality of the order passed by the designated court under the terrorist and disruptive activities (prevention) act, 1987 for bomb blast case, greater bombay rejecting the application filed by the central bureau of investigation (for short "cbi") under section 216 code of criminal procedure for addition of the charges punishable under section 302 and other charges under the indian penal code and the explosives act read with section 120-b indian penal code and also under section 3(2) of the terrorist and disruptive activities (prevention) act, 1987. the designated court framed charges in respect of certain offences and when the cbi filed an application for addition of the charge under section 302 indian penal code and other offences, the designated court rejected the application as has been indicated earlier. in the said context, the court proceeded to interpret the scope of section 216 code of criminal procedure. reference was made to the decisions in jasvinder saini (supra) and thakur shah v. king emperor manu/pr/0025/1943manu/pr/0025/1943 : (1942-43) 70 ia 196 : (1943) 56 lw 706 : air 1943 pc 192. proceeding further, it has been ruled thus:17. section 216 code of criminal procedure gives considerable power to the trial court, that is, even after the completion of evidence, arguments heard and the judgment reserved, it can alter and add to any charge, subject to the conditions mentioned therein. the expressions "at any time" and before the "judgment is pronounced" would indicate that the power is very wide and can be exercised, in appropriate cases, in the interest of justice, but at the same time, the courts should also see that its orders would not cause any prejudice to the accused.18. section 216 code of criminal procedure confers jurisdiction on all courts, including the designated courts, to alter or add to any charge framed earlier, at any time before the judgment is pronounced and sub-sections (2) to (5) prescribe the procedure which has to be followed after that addition or alteration. needless to say, the courts can exercise the power of addition or modification of charges under section 216 code of criminal procedure, only when there exists some material before the court, which has some connection or link with the charges sought to be amended, added or modified. in other words, alteration or addition of a charge must be for an offence made out by the evidence recorded during the course of trial before the court. (see harihar chakravarty v. state of w.b. (supra) merely because the charges are altered after conclusion of the trial, that itself will not lead to the conclusion that it has resulted in prejudice to the accused because sufficient safeguards have been built in section 216 code of criminal procedure and other related provisions.14. at this juncture, we have to appropriately recapitulate the principles stated in harihar chakravarty (supra). in the said case, a complaint was filed charging the appellant and another for the offences punishable under sections 409, 406, 477 and 114 of the indian penal code. the complainant and his witnesses were examined and on the basis of said evidence, the learned magistrate had framed a charge under section 409 indian penal code against the appellant. the appellant entered upon his defence and after the trial, the magistrate acquitted the appellant and the other accused under section 409 indian penal code. the complainant filed a criminal revision before the high court which set aside the order of acquittal and remanded the matter to the magistrate for decision for amendment of the charge by examining appropriate evidence. the said order was the subject matter of assail before this court. this court, addressing to the merits of the case opined thus:8. this was a private prosecution in which the complainant came forward with a story that the never ordered the appellant to purchase these shares and that therefore the shares did not belong to him, and he had no interest in them or title to them. in fact his case was that the shares were never purchased by the appellant under his instructions. all that was found to be false and it was found that he did order them to be purchased and that therefore the shares were his. the order which was made by the learned judge in effect meant that the complainant should abandon his original story to lay claim to the shares and prosecute the appellant for another and distinct offence which could only arise on a different set of facts coming into existence after the purchase of the shares. the appellant might or might not be guilty of this other offence, but he is certainly innocent of the offence with which he was charged and for which he was fully tried and therefore he is entitled to an acquittal and the learned judge had no power to set aside that order so long as he agreed, as he did, that the appellant was not guilty of the offence with which he was charged. once a charge is framed and the accused is found not guilty of that charge an acquittal must be recorded under section 258(1) of the code of criminal procedure. there is no option in the matter and we are of the opinion therefore that the order setting aside the acquittal was in any event bad.9. next as regards the direction to alter the charge so as to include an offence for which the appellant was not originally charged, that could only be done if the trial court itself had taken action under section 227 of the code of criminal procedure before it pronounced judgment. it could only have done so if there were materials before it either in the complaint or in the evidence to justify such action.10. the complaint affords no material for any such case because it is based on the allegation that the shares did not belong to the complainant and that in fact they were never purchased. the learned judge observed that the contention was that the shares belonged to the complainant and were dishonestly pledged by the appellant with the nath bank. we do not find even a word about this either in the complaint or in the examination of the complainant.(emphasis is added)15. after so stating, the court opined that there was no material on which the trial court could have amended the charge under section 227 code of criminal procedure and the learned judge therefore had no power to direct an amendment and a continuation of the same trial as he purported to do. the purpose of laying stress on the said authority is that the trial court could issue a direction for alteration of the charge if there were materials before it in the complaint or any evidence to justify such action. on the aforesaid three-judge bench decision, it is quite vivid that if there are allegations in the complaint petition or for that matter in fir or accompanying material, the court can alter the charge. in thakur shah v. king emperor (supra), what the court has held is that alteration or addition of a charge must be for an offence made out by the evidence recorded during the course of trial before the court. it does not necessarily mean that the alteration can be done only in a case where evidence is adduced. we may hasten to clarify that there has been a reference to the decision rendered in harihar chakravarty (supra) but the said reference has to be understood in the context. section 216 code of criminal procedure, as is evincible, does not lay down that the court cannot alter the charge solely because it has framed the charge. in hasanbhai valibhai qureshi (supra), it has been stated there is scope for alteration of the charge during trial on the basis of material brought on record. in jasvinder saini and ors. (supra), it has been held that circumstances in which addition or alteration of charge can be made have been stipulated in section 216 code of criminal procedure and sub-sections (2) to (5) of section 216 code of criminal procedure deal with the procedure to be followed once the court decides to alter or add any charge. it has been laid down therein that the question of any such addition or alteration generally arise either because the court finds the charge already framed to be defective for any reason or because such addition is considered necessary after the commencement of the trial having regard to the evidence that may come before the court. if the said decision is appositely understood, it clear lays down the principle which is in consonance with harihar chakravarty (supra).16. from the aforesaid, it is graphic that the court can change or alter the charge if there is defect or something is left out. the test is, it must be founded on the material available on record. it can be on the basis of the complaint or the fir or accompanying documents or the material brought on record during the course of trial. it can also be done at any time before pronouncement of judgment. it is not necessary to advert to each and every circumstance. suffice it to say, if the court has not framed a charge despite the material on record, it has the jurisdiction to add a charge. similarly, it has the authority to alter the charge. the principle that has to be kept in mind is that the charge so framed by the magistrate is in accord with the materials produced before him or if subsequent evidence comes on record. it is not to be understood that unless evidence has been let in, charges already framed cannot be altered, for that is not the purport of section 216 code of criminal procedure.17. in addition to what we have stated hereinabove, another aspect also has to be kept in mind. it is obligatory on the part of the court to see that no prejudice is caused to the accused and he is allowed to have a fair trial. there are in-built safeguards in section 216 code of criminal procedure. it is the duty of the trial court to bear in mind that no prejudice is caused to the accused as that has the potentiality to affect a fair trial. it has been held in amar singh v. state of haryana manu/sc/0079/1973manu/sc/0079/1973 : (1974) 3 scc 81 that the accused must always be made aware of the case against them so as to enable him to understand the defence that he can lead. an accused can be convicted for an offence which is minor than the one he has been charged with, unless the accused satisfies the court that there has been a failure of justice by the non-framing of a charge under a particular penal provision, and some prejudice has been caused to the accused. while so stating, we may reproduce the following two passages from bhimanna v. state of karnataka manu/sc/0720/2012manu/sc/0720/2012 : (2012) 9 scc 650:25. further, the defect must be so serious that it cannot be covered under sections 464/465 code of criminal procedure, which provide that, an order of sentence or conviction shall not be deemed to be invalid only on the ground that no charge was framed, or that there was some irregularity or omission or misjoinder of charges, unless the court comes to the conclusion that there was also, as a consequence, a failure of justice. in determining whether any error, omission or irregularity in framing the charges has led to a failure of justice, this court must have regard to whether an objection could have been raised at an earlier stage during the proceedings or not. while judging the question of prejudice or guilt, the court must bear in mind that every accused has a right to a fair trial, where he is aware of what he is being tried for and where the facts sought to be established against him, are explained to him fairly and clearly, and further, where he is given a full and fair chance to defend himself against the said charge(s).26. this court in sanichar sahni v. state of bihar manu/sc/0888/2009manu/sc/0888/2009 : (2009) 7 scc 198, while considering the issue placed reliance upon various judgments of this court particularly on topandas v. state of bombay manu/sc/0032/1955manu/sc/0032/1955 : air 1956 sc 33, willie (william) slaney v. state of m.p. manu/sc/0038/1955manu/sc/0038/1955 : air 1956 sc 116, fakhruddin v. state of m.p. manu/sc/0332/1966manu/sc/0332/1966 : air 1967 sc 1326, state of a.p. v. thakkidiram reddy manu/sc/0490/1998manu/sc/0490/1998 : (1998) 6 scc 554, ramji singh v. state of bihar manu/sc/0632/2001manu/sc/0632/2001 : (2001) 9 scc 528 and gurpreet singh v. state of punjab manu/sc/2515/2005manu/sc/2515/2005 : (2005) 12 scc 615 and came to the following conclusion: (sanichar sahni case (supra), scc p. 204, para 27)27. therefore ... unless the convict is able to establish that defect in framing the charges has caused real prejudice to him and that he was not informed as to what was the real case against him and that he could not defend himself properly, no interference is required on mere technicalities. conviction order in fact is to be tested on the touchstone of prejudice theory.a similar view has been reiterated in abdul sayeed v. state of m.p. manu/sc/0702/2010manu/sc/0702/2010 : (2010) 10 scc 25918. we have reproduced the aforesaid passages by abundant caution so that while adding or altering a charge under section 216 code of criminal procedure, the trial court must keep both the aforestated principles in view. the test of prejudice, as has been stated in the aforesaid judgment, has to be borne in mind.19. presently to the second aspect. submission of mr. sharan is that the learned magistrate could not have entertained the application preferred by the informant, for such an application is incompetent because it has to be filed by the public prosecutor. in this regard, he has laid stress on the decision in shiv kumar v. hukam chand and anr. manu/sc/0533/1999manu/sc/0533/1999 : (1999) 7 scc 467. in the said case, the grievance of the appellant was that counsel engaged by him was not allowed by the high court to conduct the prosecution in spite of obtaining a consent from the concerned public prosecutor. the trial court had passed an order to the extent that the advocate engaged by the informant shall conduct the case under the supervision, guidance and control of the public prosecutor. he had further directed that the public prosecutor shall retain with himself the control over the proceedings. the said order was challenged before the high court and the learned single judge allowing the revision had directed that the lawyer appointed by the complainant or private person shall act under the directions from the public prosecutor and may with the permission of the court submit written arguments after evidence is closed and the public prosecutor in-charge of the case shall conduct the prosecution. this court referred to sections 301, 302(2), 225 code of criminal procedure and various other provisions and came to hold as follows:13. from the scheme of the code the legislative intention is manifestly clear that prosecution in a sessions court cannot be conducted by anyone other than the public prosecutor. the legislature reminds the state that the policy must strictly conform to fairness in the trial of an accused in a sessions court. a public prosecutor is not expected to show a thirst to reach the case in the conviction of the accused somehow or the other irrespective of the true facts involved in the case. the expected attitude of the public prosecutor while conducting prosecution must be couched in fairness not only to the court and to the investigating agencies but to the accused as well. if an accused is entitled to any legitimate benefit during trial the public prosecutor should not scuttle/conceal it. on the contrary, it is the duty of the public prosecutor to winch it to the fore and make it available to the accused. even if the defence counsel overlooked it, the public prosecutor has the added responsibility to bring it to the notice of the court if it comes to his knowledge. a private counsel, if allowed a free hand to conduct prosecution would focus on bringing the case to conviction even if it is not a fit case to be so convicted. that is the reason why parliament applied a bridle on him and subjected his role strictly to the instructions given by the public prosecutor.14. it is not merely an overall supervision which the public prosecutor is expected to perform in such cases when a privately engaged counsel is permitted to act on his behalf. the role which a private counsel in such a situation can play is, perhaps, comparable with that of a junior advocate conducting the case of his senior in a court. the private counsel is to act on behalf of the public prosecutor albeit the fact that he is engaged in the case by a private party. if the role of the public prosecutor is allowed to shrink to a mere supervisory role the trial would become a combat between the private party and the accused which would render the legislative mandate in section 225 of the code a dead letter.20. being of this view, this court upheld the order passed by the high court. the said decision is, in our opinion, is distinguishable on facts. the instant case does not pertain to trial or any area by which a private lawyer takes control of the proceedings. as is evident, an application was filed by the informant to add a charge under section 406 indian penal code as there were allegations against the husband about the criminal breach of trust as far as her stridhan is concerned. it was, in a way, bringing to the notice of the learned magistrate about the defect in framing of the charge. the court could have done it suo motu. in such a situation, we do not find any fault on the part of learned magistrate in entertaining the said application. it may be stated that the learned magistrate has referred to the materials and recorded his prima facie satisfaction. there is no error in the said prima facie view. we also do not perceive any error in the revisional order by which it has set aside the charge framed against the mother-in-law. accordingly, we affirm the order of the high court in expressing its disinclination to interfere with the order passed in revision. we may clarify that the entire scrutiny is only for the purpose of framing of charge and nothing else. the learned magistrate will proceed with the trial and decide the matter as per the evidence brought on record and shall not be influenced by any observations made as the same have to be restricted for the purpose of testing the legal defensibility of the impugned order.21. consequently, the appeal, being devoid of merit, stands dismissed.1crr 657 of 2015 [high court of punjab and haryana]2criminal misc. no. m-1044 of 2014 (o & m) order dated 07.03.2014
h.k. sema, j.1. four appellants - anthony d'souza, anil kumar @ anil d'souza, seril d'souza and george d'souza @ babli were tried by the additional sessions judge, chikmagalur and convicted for the offences under section 143 ipc. section 396 read with 149 ipc and section 201 read with 149 ipc and sentenced to undergo si for six months for the offence under section 143 ipc, rigorous imprisonment for life for the offence under section 396 read with section 149 ipc and a fine of rs. 5000/- each. in default of payment of fine si for three months and to undergo two years ri and to pay a fine of rs. 2000/- each for the offence under section 201 read with section 149 ipc in default of payment of fine, si for three months. all the substantive sentences were ordered to run concurrently. on appeal their conviction and sentence is confirmed by the high court. hence the present appeal.2. briefly stated facts are as follows:-3. deceased vittal shetty and paul were employed as driver and cleaner in a lorry bearing registration no. cno 8928 belonging to kiran transport company owned by pw-5 sri castelino and his son pw-16 kiran castelino. on 17-2-1992, pws 5 and 16 had sent the lorry driven by substituted driver pw-15 puttumonu along with deceased paul to penambur to take delivery of 200 bags of mangala urea from its factory to be taken to mysore coffee curing works at balehonnur. pw-9 balakrishna was the clerk of venkatadri transport company which has a office by the side of mangalore chemical fertilizer factory, got the fertilizer bags loaded between 11.30 a.m. to 3.30 p.m. after handing over necessary documents including the delivery note, the driver and the cleaner left for mangalore. sometime at about 5.00 p.m., the regular driver deceased vittal shetty reported back to his duty and he was asked by pw-5 to proceed to balehonnur with the loaded lorry of fertilizer bags. deceased driver along with his cleaner deceased paul then proceeded towards balahonnur at about 7.30 p.. on 17.2.1992. it is stated that at about 1.30 in the night both the deceased halted the lorry at kottigehara at bharath hotel run by one ibrahim pw-12 for taking tea. when both the deceased were about to leave along with the lorry, it is stated that all the four appellants along with one juvenile offender boarded the truck after some talk and left kottigehara. since then nothing has been heard about the truck or the driver. it is only on 18-2-1992, one parswanatha jain pw-1, a resident of jenugudde village receives information of finding a dead body in a culvert. he booked a trunk call to the police at balehonnur police station. on receipt of phone message, sho of balehonnur police station proceeded to the jenugudde along with the staff and observed some injuries on the dead body. he came back to the police station and suo motu registered a case in crime no. 16/92 for the offence under section 302 ipc against an unknown offender. thereafter, the investigation is taken over by mallikarjunappa pw-33, the psi of balehonnur police station. in course of investigation, the prosecution examined as many as 36 witnesses and finding a prima facie case, challan was filed against the appellants. admittedly, there is no direct eye witness and the prosecution case rests entirely on circumstantial evidence. the prosecution relied on the following circumstantial evidence:-(a) on 18.2.1992 at about 9.15 a.m., the four appellants along with juvenile offender went to belagodu primary health unit and informed gangadhariah pw-17 who was a group "d" employee, that they were injured in a lorry accident and asked for immediate medical treatment. on noticing the serious injuries on one of the accused, pw-17 directed them to go to sakleshpur general hospital.(b) the appellants then went to a coffee estate run by rafiq ahmed pw-27 at belagodu and sought his assistance to go to sakleshpur. pw-27 noticed the condition of the injured and contained his relative at sakleshpur to arrange a taxi so as to provide transportation to the injured to balegodu.(c) pw-30 feroze khan the owner of taxi was engaged and sent to belagodu being driven by himself. pw-30 took the injured to government hospital, sakleshpur and received his taxi charges of rs. 60 from the accused.(d) at government hospital sakleshpur, the injured disclosed their names as j. d'souza s/o joseph, anil s/o joseph, manjunatha (juvenile offender) to the medical officer dr. prakash inamdar pw-28. they also informed pw-28 that they sustained injuries in a truck accident near belagodu village on 18.2.1992.(e) pw-28 made necessary entries in the medical-legal case registered vide ex. p 32(a)(b) & (c) at pages 243 and 244 of the register. the doctor also noticed serious injures on the person called j. d'souza. he accordingly advised them to go to a major hospital at mangalore.(f) the accused went to the taxi stand and again met pw-30 and engaged his taxi to take them to mangalore. the taxi of pw-30 went out of order near uppinangadi and pw-30 asked them to engage another vehicle. accused did not have enough money for paying the full charges. they paid rs. 200/- in addition to one wrist watch worn by one of them. they, however, promised pw-30 that they would come back and pay the balance and take back the writ watch after about three or four days.(g) the accused on reaching mangalore after engaging another vehicle, two of them went to wenlock hospital at about 4.00 p.m. and dr. vasanth kumar, pw-26 treated them. doctor noticed one of the injured persons, named as george d'souza, was serious accompanied by another injured named sunil (later established as anil). they also told the doctor that they had received injuries in a road accident. doctor entered the same in the medico-legal case register and sent the mlo to the jurisdictional police.(h) on 18.2.1992 at about 5.40 p.m. pw-35 vasudeva asi and sho of mangalore south police station went to the hospital and noticed that one of the injured was in a serious condition and others with simple injuries were able to talk. he recorded the statement of able injured who disclosed his name as sunil fernandis and that of seriously injured as george d'souza. he also told pw-35 that they sustained injuries in the motor accident near belagodu. he has recorded the statement vide ex. p.49 and also registered a case in crime no. 57/92 for the offences under sections 279 and 337 ipc against the unknown lorry driver. pw-35 having noticed that the accident had taken place within the jurisdiction of sakleshpur police station transferred the case to the jurisdiction police.(i) the case was then re-registered in crime no. 25/92 at sakleshpur rural police station and pw-32 located the lorry bearing registration no. cno 8928 and from the lorry he found out that it belongs to pws 5 and 16 and contacted them over the phone intimating them that the lorry had met with an accident near belagodu village and three persons named george, anil and manjunath had received injuries in the accident and that they were being treated at wenlock hospital at mangalore.(j) on receipt of the information pws 5 and 16 went to wenlock hospital and on inquiry came to know that the injured got themselves discharged against the advice of the doctor pw-26 and gone to kmc hospital, bijai. in kmc hospital, they found that one injured person by name george was serious and was admitted in intensive care unit and unable to talk. pw-5 left behind pw-16 to get the particulars.(k) sometime in the evening pw-16 noticed that three persons along with a young boy came to the kmc hospital, bijai and when the three persons went to icu leaving behind the boy, pw-16 out of curiosity made enquiry and learnt from the boy that all the three persons and the juvenile were injured in the lorry which met with an accident at belagodu. the boy further alleged to have revealed that he was working as a coolie and on 17.2.1992 the four accused brought him to hotel at kottigehara at about midnight. when the lorry stopped at the hotel they requested the driver to take them as passengers. all of them sat in the cabin and after some distance one of them got the lorry stopped on the pretext of attending calls of nature and then anil (a-2) tried to strangulate the driver with a plastic rope and when the driver and the cleaner tried to run away they were hit with the wooden block called as 'katte" and killed both of them. the boy further alleged to have revealed that after taking the money from the person of the driver as well as the wrist watch accused (a-1) and other took the vehicle towards the forest in order to dispose of the dead bodies. the boy further alleged to have disclosed that when they kept the body of the driver in a culvert near jenugudde and before they could dispose of the body of the cleaner in the same way they heard the sound of approaching vehicle and they proceeded ahead in the lorry and thereafter the body of cleaner was also kept under a culvert. the boy further alleged to have disclosed that thereafter the lorry was driven to the estate of one rajegowda pw-13 and after unloading the fertilizer bags, while they were proceeding towards belagodu, the lorry met with an accident and all of them got injured.4. this is how the accused were roped in with the crime by the circumstances as recited above.5. after the accused were arrested they were interrogated. accused nos. 1 and 3 made the voluntary disclosure statements vide ex. p.39 and 40 leading to the discovery and seizure of 193 bags of fertilizer from the estate of pw-13 rajegowda and the wrist watch mo-19 belonging to the deceased vittal shetty from pw-30 the taxi driver. the disclosure statement led to the recovery of wooden 'katte'. mo-20 alleged to have been used by the accused for the murder of deceased vittal shetty and deceased paul. in course of the trial, accused no. 5 manjunath is stated to be a juvenile offender and his case was split up and only four accused were tried in sessions case.6. to establish the guilt of the accused the prosecution has examined as many as pws 1 to 36, exs. p.1 to p.49 and m.os. 1 to 24. in their examination under section 313 i.p.c., the accused totally denied the prosecution story. they, however, declined to lead any dws.7. it is contended by mr. vijay panjwani, learned amicus curiae, that the prosecution case rests entirely on the circumstantial evidence and the prosecution in such a case is required to prove all the links in the chain of circumstances which would lead to unerringly one conclusion and that is the guilt of the accused. according to him, the chain of circumstances linking to the guilt of the accused has not been discharged by the prosecution.8. as already noticed, there is a concurrent finding of facts by both the courts and this court would be slow to interfere with the concurrent finding of facts unless there is some perversity in the finding. it is also established principle of law that in a case resting on circumstantial evidence, the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is drawn must unerringly lead to one conclusion consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. keeping in view this principle we now to proceed to find out whether the finding arrived at by the two courts suffers from any infirmity.9. before we advert further, we may point out that all the prosecution witnesses were independent witnesses and there is no allegation of malice or rancour towards the accused. the witnesses were also subjected to lengthy cross-examination but their testimony remained unimpeached.10. it is not disputed that on 17.2.1992, the lorry bearing no. cno 8928 loaded with 200 mangalore urea bags, driven by deceased vittal shetty accompanied by cleaner deceased paul left mangalore towards balehonnur. the said lorry belongs to pws 5 and 16 of kiran transport company. the said lorry met with an accident near belagodu when the accused were injured in the same accident. this is borne out from the witnesses of pws 17, 27 and 30 who are the persons who were immediately approached by the accused after the accident and their help was sought to go to hospital. the evidence of pws 17, 27 and 30 has also been corroborated by the evidence of medical officers p.ws. 28, 26 and 29. it is the evidence of pw-17 ganga shetty, a group 'd' employee of health unit at belagodu that on 18.2.1992 all the accused along with a boy came to health unit and informed him that they had sustained injuries in an accident to the lorry in which they were travelling. as there was no medical officer available, he directed the accused to approach the general hospital at sakleshpur. he stated that one of the accused had serious injury on his head. the statement of pw-17 is corroborated by the evidence of pws 27 and 30. as noticed, pw-17 was a "d" class employee of phu, belagodu and residing near the place of accident, it is quite natural that the accused would go to the nearest place where medical aid is available. further the evidence of pw-17 is corroborated by the evidence of pw 27 who is a coffee estate owner of belagodu village. it is in the statement of pw-27 that in the morning at about 9.00 a.m. on 18.2.1992 accused nos. 1 to 4 came to his estate out of whom one was seriously injured and sought his help to go to hospital at sakleshpur. it is also stated that after seeing the condition of the injured, he telephoned to a relative who is also proprietor of hilal coffee works at sakaleshpur and requested him to arrange for sending a taxi to take the injured to the sakaleshpur hospital. at about 10.30 a.m. a taxi came and injured were taken in taxi towards sakaleshpur. the evidence of pw-27 is further corroborated by the evidence of ferozkhan pw-30, the taxi driver. pw-30 stated that he is a taxi driver driving a taxi bearing registration no. mex 2837. on receipt of communication from the proprietor of hilal coffee works that there was a phone call from belagodu stating that an accident had happened at belagodu and the injured were required to be shifted to a hospital, he took the taxi, went to belagodu and reached the outskirts by about 9.30 or 9.45 a.m. and saw some persons standing and one of them was seriously injured. he took them to government hospital, sakaleshpur and received the taxi charges of rs. 60/- from them. the accused were identified by pws 17, 27 and 30. the evidence of p.w. 30 that he took the accused from belagodu to sakaleshpur belagodu to sakaleshpur hospital has been corroborated by the evidence of dr. prakash inamdar pw-28. it is stated in the evidence of pw-28 that he was a medical officer in the govt. hospital at sakaleshpur and on 18.12.1992 he had examined three injured persons who disclosed their names as d'souza s/o joseph d'souza, anil s/o joseph d'souza and manjunath s/o r. shetty. the accused also informed him that they were victims of a motor vehicle accident near belagodu village. pw-28 not only treated the accused but also noted down the injures in the medico legal register and the same is marked vide ex.p-32 and the relevant entries at p-32 a, b & c. it is consistent that the accused were injured in a lorry accident at belagodu village and later came to sakaleshpur government hospital with the help of pws 27 and 30. in the light of the facts recited, the following circumstances are clearly established against the accused.11. the first circumstantial evidence connecting with the accused is again the evidence of pw-30, the taxi driver. it is noticed in the evidence of pw-27 (medical officer) who had advised the accused to take the seriously injured to a major hospital at mangalore. according to the prosecution case the accused again came back to the taxi stand and met pw-30 and asked him to take the injured to mangalore in his taxi. pw-30 agreed to the request on the condition that they would pay his taxi charges of rs. 550/-. the charges were stated to be settled at rs. 500/- and they left towards mangalore. it is in the evidence of pw-30 that while they were proceeding near uppinangadi some mechanical defect developed in the taxi and he asked the accused to make alternative arrangement. it is further stated that on being demand of taxi charges the accused expressed their inability to pay the whole amount and paid rs. 200/- and on being insisted by pw-30 for full payment a sum of rs. 200/- along with "ceiko" writ watch had been given stating that they would come back and take the writ watch back after three or four days after paying the balance amount. as already stated pw-30 met with all the accused persons on two occasions. he was well acquainted with the accused and clearly recognised them in the court. there is no malice or ill-feeling of pw-30 towards the accused. he was subjected to lengthy cross examination but nothing could be elicited to discredit his testimony. the statement of pw-30 has also been corroborated by the seizure of mo-19. this again further strengthened the prosecution story connecting the accused with the crime. pw-5, the employer of the deceased vittal shetty and pw-8 raghunath shetty the younger brother of the deceased had specifically and positively identified that mo-19 a wrist watch belongs to the deceased vittal shetty. pw-8 being the younger brother of the deceased vittal shetty is quite natural that he had sufficient and occasion to see the wrist watch (ceiko company) being worn by the deceased vittal shetty. pw-5 the employer of vittal shetty also clearly stated that he had seen the deceased wearing mo-19 whenever he comes for duty.12. from the evidence disclosed above it is apparently clear that the accused received injures on their bodies in a lorry accident at belagodu and went from belagodu to sakleshpur has been well established by the prosecution.13. the second circumstantial evidence against the accused is that they were being treated by the doctors of the injuries sustained by them in an accident involving the lorry in question. dr. vasanthkumar, pw-26 has stated that he examined one injured named george d'souza (a-4) brought by one sunil (established as anil) from sakaleshpur and noticed injuries on his body and recorded the wound certificate ex.p-30. according to him, it was a case of injury of lorry accident. he has stated that the person accompanying the injured had given his name as sunil. this doctor in his examination-in-chief produced ex.p-30 and stated that while attending to the injury he has noted identifiable marks on the body of the both the injured george and sunil. he has found a black mole in front of the neck of george d'souza and in the court with the help of birth mark. he has identified the accused no. 4 as the person who was brought by sunil in the injured condition. in regard to sunil, he again noted the injuries on him and issued the wound certificate vide ex.p-31. he has stated before the court that he noted the identification mark on said sunil as having brown mole of 2" below the right nipple in front of chest. this witness identified accused no. 2 (established as anil) as the person who brought a-4 to the hospital and gave his name as sunil and the identification is done after seeking the birth mark in ex.p-31. identification marks of accused nos. 2 and 4 by pw-26 in the court with physical identifiable mark noted in ex.p-30 and 31 tallying with the actual birth marks in the courts clearly establish beyond any reasonable doubt that it was accused nos. 2 and 4 who went to the wenlock hospital in injured condition on 18.2.1992 with the history of road accident. this apart, as already noticed, a-2 also lodged a complaint of the accident vide ex.p-45. pw-35 b. vasudeva psi of mangalore south police station recorded the statement of a-2 as ex.p-19 wherein he stated his name as sunil. in ex.p-19 statement a-2 stated that on 18.2.1992 he along with his brother-in-law a-4 travelled in a lorry towards mangalore and when the lorry came near belagodu due to rash and negligent driving of the driver at about 10.30 am the lorry capsized and the inmates received the injures and the driver and the cleaner ran away from the place. it is seen, thus, a-2 had admitted that a-2 and a-4 traveled in the truck and met with an accident at belagodu and both of them received injuries and they were brought to sakleshpur by car for treatment and from there to wenlock hospital, mangalore. a-2, however, disowned his statement and even denied of receiving any injures or there was any lorry accident, in his statement under section 313 cr.p.c.14. the third circumstantial evidence relied upon by the prosecution connecting the accused with the guilt is the various recoveries made at the disclosure of the accused. at the time of interrogation accused nos. 1 to 3 made disclosure statements leading to the discovery of incriminating materials. a-3 gave a voluntary disclosure statement ex.p-14 which led to the discovery of wrist watch m-19 of deceased vittal shetty from pw-30 the taxi driver. as already noticed ex.m-19 wrist watch belongs to the deceased vittal shetty has been proved by pws 5 and 8. the other recovery is 193 of fertilizer from the estate of pw-13. this recovery has been made on the basis of the voluntary statement vide ex.p-39 made by a-1. pursuant to the disclosure statement pw-34 recovered 193 bags of mangala urea which were found stored in the godown of pw-13. the said urea bags were carried by the deceased in the lorry from mangalore to balehonnur. pw-13 was declared hostile and did not support the prosecution story. pw-13, however, admitted that a-3 serial d'souza was working as a servant in his estate. he has also admitted that around 23rd or 24th february, 1992 the police party came to his estate and seized 193 bags of fertilizer from his estate. he has also admitted that he has put his signature on the seizure panchanama ex.p-15. although pw-13 did not support the prosecution story, but two facts were established by the prosecution that a-3 was his servant and 193 bags of fertilizer which did not belong to him were seized from his estate by the police on a voluntary disclosure statement made by a-3, 193 bags which were part of 200 bags of mangala urea which were carried by the said lorry from mangalore to balehonnur. the seizure has been proved by the iq and the panch witness. the fertilizer bags belong to m.c.c.w. of ballehonnur has been proved by pw-8 as being purchased by the pennabur factory.15. the fourth circumstantial evidence appearing against the accused is the recovery of mos. 20, 21 and 22 at the instance of a-3. m-20 is the wooden "katte" alleged to have been used for murdering both the deceased. both the courts below did not place much reliance on mo-21 the side mirror of the lorry and mo-22 sun mica piece fixed at the lorry. however, both the courts relied upon m-20 the assaulting weapon. further m-20 was stained with blood and it was sent to forensic science lab and it is confirmed to have been stained with human blood.16. the last and probably the most formidable circumstantial evidence against the accused is their own conduct. it appears that the accused were entangled in their own cob-web. as already noticed a-2 lodged the complaint ex.p-45. in the complaint a-2 has stated that they were the occupants of the lorry which met with an accident on 18.2.1992 near belagodu vis sakaleshpur due to rash and negligent driving of the driver. their lorry fell down reversibly and due to the accident the complainant and his cousin d'souza suffered severe injuries and they are being treated in government hospital. on the basis of the complaint, a case was registered under section 279/337 ipc. in the complaint a-2 gave his name as sunil farnandis which later on proved to be false and established as anil, as noticed earlier. there is also enough evidence on record that accused have been treated at various hospitals which is borne out from the evidence of dr. prakash inamdar p-28 and dr. vasanthkumar pw-26 and pw-29 dr. chandra kumar ballal, as noticed earlier. this would go to show that the accused had admitted the boarding of the lorry and the lorry met with an accident and they sustained injuries on their bodies out of the lorry accident. in their examination under section 313 cr.pc the accused denied the prosecution story in toto. they denied that lorry accident had taken place. they also denied to have received any injuries. in short, in their 313 statement they completely denied the established facts and offered false answers. by now it is well established principle of law that in a case of circumstantial evidence where an accused offers false answer in his examination under 313 against the established facts that can be counted as providing a missing link for completing the chain.17. in swapan patra v. state of west bengal, : (1999)9scc242 : (1999)9scc242 , this court said that in a case of circumstantial evidence when the accused offers an explanation and that explanation is found not to be true then the same offers an additional link in the chain of circumstances to complete the chain. the same principle has been followed and reiterate in state of maharashtra v. suresh manu/sc/0765/1999manu/sc/0765/1999 : (2000)1scc471 , where it has been said that a false answer offered by the accused when his attention was drawn to a circumstance, renders that circumstance capable of inculpating him. this court further pointed out that in such a situation false answer can also be counted as providing a missing link for completing the chain. the aforesaid principle has been again followed and reiterate in kuldeep singh and ors. v. state of rajasthan , manu/sc/0303/2000manu/sc/0303/2000 : 2001crilj479 .18. in our view, therefore, the chain of circumstances as recited above coupled with the law laid down by this court unerringly lead to one conclusion and that is the guilt of the accused.19. however, one error has been committed by the high court by converting the conviction from section 396 read with section 149 i.p.c. to one under section 396 in aid of section 34 i.p.c. it is in the evidence of pw-16 kiran castolina that the juvenile accused manjunath had disclosed to him that all the five accused participated in the murder of deceased vittal shetty and paul. as already noticed the trial of juvenile accused manjunath has been splitted. the trial court, therefore, was right in convicting the appellants under section 302 ipc read with section 149 ipc.20. in the result, this appeal is dismissed, being devoid of merit.21. we record our appreciation of mr. panjwani, learned amices-curiae for his able assistance.
v.n. khare, j.1. appellant nos. 4 to 22 before us are the companies incorporated under the indian companies act and are engaged in the business of production and sale of sugar. these appellants own sugar factories (hereinafter referred to as 'sugar factories') which are located in various parts of the state of uttar pradesh. one of the raw materials required for production of sugar is sugarcane which is purchased for sugarcane growers through sugarcane cooperative societies - which are the respondents in these matters. the purchase of sugarcane by the sugar factories is regulated under the provisions of u.p. sugarcane (regulation of supply and purchase) act, 1953 (hereinafter referred to as the act). in exercise of power conferred under section 28 of the act, the state government has framed rules known as the u.p. sugarcane (regulation of supply and purchase) rules, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the rules). section 13 of the act requires the sugar factories to pay a commission known as society commission to the cooperative cane societies a share of which is also transferred to the cane development council. the rate at which the said commission is payable is left to be determined and prescribed by the state government by the statutory rules. the share of commission which comes to the cooperative societies is to cover their administrative costs, which include mainly the maintenance of staff deputed for undertaking various cooperatives activities connected with the sale of sugarcane to the sugar factories.2. in the year 1985, the government of uttar pradesh by amending rule 49 of the rules raised the society commission to .50 paise per quintal vide notification dated 11.7.85. subsequently, the government of uttar pradesh by a subsequent notification dated 1.6.91 again amended rule 49 and revised the rate of society commission from the existing rate of .50 paise per quintal to 5% of the minimum statutory cane price fixed by the central government. after the existing rate of commission was enhanced, the appellants jointly submitted representation before the state government, inter alia, contending that enhancement is excessive and arbitrary. simultaneously, the appellants also filed writ petition challenging the enhancement of society commission. however, in january 1992, the writ petition was withdrawn.3. it appears, the state government on the representation of the appellants reduced the rate of society commission from 5% of the minimum statutory price of sugarcane to 2.69% of the minimum statutory price of sugarcane which worked out to .70 paise per quintal. this was done by the amendment of rule 49 of the rules by notification dated 24. 4.92. the notification dated 24.4.92 runs as under:"1. (1) these rules may be called the uttar pradesh sugarcane (regulation of supply and purchase) (amendment) rules, 1992.(2) they shall remain in force with effect from 1.10.91 to 30.9.92.2. in the uttar pradesh sugarcane (regulation of supply and purchases) rules, 1954, for the rules set out in column 1 below, the rules as set out in column 2 shall be substituted:-4. the affect of the aforesaid notification was that existing rule 49 was deleted and in its place new rule 49 was substituted. however, the substituted rule remained operative from 1.10.91 to 30.9.92. it is not disputed that the appellants herein continued to pay the society commission on the basis of substituted rule 49 i.e. @ 2.69% of the minimum statutory price of sugarcane. after 30.9.92. the cane commissioner of uttar pradesh issued a circular to the effect that the society commission after 30.9.92 shall be charged @ 5% of the minimum statutory price of sugarcane fixed by the central government on the premise that since the substituted rule came to be inoperative after 30.9.92, the old rule 49 revived.5. since the respondents insisted to charge society commission @ 5% of the minimum statutory price of sugarcane fixed by the central government, it is alleged that the appellants were compelled to file a writ petition before the high court of judicature at allahabad. in the said writ petition, the appellants challenged the order dated 5.1.93 passed by the cane commissioner whereby and whereunder the cane commissioner issued direction to realise society commission @ 5% of the minimum statutory price of sugarcane, fixed by the central government.6. one of the grounds of challenge of the said circular was that once the old rule 49 having been deleted and substituted by new rule 49 providing for 2.69% of the minimum statutory price of sugarcane even though it has ceased to be operative after 30.9.92, the old rule does not revive and the respondents have no authority in law to charge society commission @ 5% of the minimum statutory price of sugarcane. the high court was of the view that on the application of section 6-c of the u.p. general clauses act, the repealed or delated rule 49 revived after the substituted rule 49 ceased to be operative. in that view of the matter, the writ petition was dismissed. it is against the said judgment and order of the high court, the appellants have filed the present appeal by way of special leave petition and there is also a connected writ petition under article 32 of the constitution, challenging the impugned society commission.7. learned counsel for the appellants raised two submissions. the first submission is that, after the statutory rule 49 providing for society commission @ 5% of the minimum statutory price of sugarcane having been deleted or repealed and substituted by a new rule 49, providing for society commission @ 2.69% of the minimum statutory price of sugarcane, the old rule 49 does not revive even after the substituted rule ceased to be operative. the second argument is that, in any event of the matter, the high court was not legally justified in applying section 6-c of u.p. general clauses act for holding that after the substituted rules having become inoperative, the old rule 49 would revive. whereas, learned counsel appearing for the respondents urged that since the substituted rule in pith and substance has been rendered non-existent, the old rule would revive and the respondents have a right to charge society commission at the rate under the old rules.8. on the argument of learned counsel for the parties, the first question that arise for our consideration is that once the old rule has been deleted or repealed and substituted by a new rule, whether the old rule would revive when the substituted rule ceased to be operative.9. in b.n. tiwari v. union of india & ors. - manu/sc/0312/1964manu/sc/0312/1964 : [1965]2scr421 , the question whether the old rule revives after the substituted rule was struck down came up for consideration before this court. in the said case, the central services rule of 1952 provided for carry forward rule whereby the unfilled reserved vacancy of a particular year could be carried forward for one year. in the year 1955, the said 1952 rule was substituted by another rule providing that unfilled reserved vacancies of a particular year would be carried forward for two year subsequently, the 1955 rule was declared ultra vires. in that context, the question arose whether the 1952 rule had revived after the 1955 rule was struck down. a constitution bench of this court held that old 1952 rule having repealed and substituted by the 1955 rule, the old 1952 rule would not revive after the 1955 rule was struck down by this court.10. in firm a.t.b. mehtab majid & co. v. state of madras & anr - manu/sc/0352/1962manu/sc/0352/1962 : air1963sc928 , it was held that where an old rule has been substituted by a new rule, it ceases to exist and does not get revive when the new rule is held invalid.11. in indian express newspaper (bom) pvt. ltd. & ors. etc. v. union of india & ors. - : manu/sc/0406/1984manu/sc/0406/1984 : [1986] 159 itr 856(sc) , the government of india issued a notification dated july 15, 1977, which was in force prior to march 1, 1981 under which total exemption had been granted. subsequently, the said notification was substituted by another notification dated march 1, 1981. the question arose whether the old notification dated july 15, 1977 would revive on quashing of the notification dated march 1, 1981. this court held that on striking down of subsequent notification, the repealed notification does not revive.12. we are in total agreement with the statement of law declared by this court in the aforesaid decisions.13. in the present case, sub-section (1) of section 18 of the act provides that there shall be paid by the occupier of a factory or a gur, rab or khandsari sugar manufacturing unit a commission for every one maund of cane purchased by the factory or sugarcane manufacturing unit. sub-section (2) of the said section further provides that a commission payable under sub-section (1) shall be at such rates as may be prescribed by the state government. under section 28 of the act, the state government is empowered to frame rules prescribing the rate of commission payable by the occupier of the factory or manufacturing unit.14. the government of u.p., in exercise of power under section 28 read with section 18 of the act, amended rule 49 by deleting it an substituting the same by a new rule 49 which provided the society commission @ 2.69% of the minimum statutory cane price fixed by the government of india. the notification dated 24.4.94 which has been extensively extracted above very clearly and in an unambiguous terms provided that old rule set out in column 1 below the rules shall be substituted by the rule set out in column 2. in fact, by doing so, the government was very clear in its intention that it is substituting an old rule by a new one. had the government ever intended that after 30.9.92 the old rule would revive, it could have added a proviso to the old rule 49 providing for society commission @ 2.69% with effect from 1.10.91 to 30.9.92. the deliberate omission to provide what has been contained in the new rule 49 by way of a proviso to old rule 49 shows that the state government intended to repeal the old rule and substitute it by a new rule 49.15. it would have been a different case where a subsequent law which modified the earlier law held to be void. in such a case, the earlier law shall be deemed to have never been modified or repealed and, therefore, continued to be in force. where it is found that the legislature lacked competence to enact a law, still amends the existing law and subsequently it is found that the legislature or the authority was denuded with the power to amend the existing law, in such a case the old law would revive and continue. but it is not the case here. it is not disputed that the state government under section 28 read with section 18 of the act, has power to frame rule prescribing the society commission. the state government by substituting new rule 49 never intended to keep alive the old rule. the totality of the circumstances shows that the old rule was deleted and came to be substituted by new rule 49 and, therefore, we are of the view that after new rule 49 ceased to be operative, the old rule 49 did not revive.16. learned counsel for the respondent then pressed into service sub- section (2) of section 6-c of the u.p. general clauses act and contended that where any amendment of text is made by any temporary u.p. act or by an ordinance, or by any law made in exercise of the power of the state legislature by the president, such act. ordinance or to her law ceases to operate without being re-enacted, the amendment of text made thereby shall also cease to operate. it was, therefore, strongly argued that on application of section 6-c of the u.p. general clauses act, after substituted rule 49 ceased to be operative and the same having been not re-enacted, the old rule 49 revived. the contention has no merit. section 6-c of the u.p. general clauses act runs as under:"6-c. repeal or expiration of law-making textual, amendments in other laws. - (1) except as provided by sub-section (2), where any uttar pradesh act amends the text of any uttar pradesh act or regulation by the express omission, insertion or substitution of any matter, the amending enactment is subsequently repealed, the repeal shall not affect the continuance of any such amendment made by the enactment so repealed and in operation at the time of such repeal.(2). where any such amendment of text is made by any temporary uttar pradesh act or by an ordinance or by any law made in exercise of the power of the state legislature by the president or other authority referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of articles 357 of the constitution, and such act. ordinance or other law ceases to operate without being re-enacted (with or without modifications) the amendment of text made thereby shall also cease to operate."17. section 20 of the u.p. general clauses act provides that where, by any uttar pradesh act, a power to issue any statutory amendment is conferred, then expressions used in the statutory instruments shall, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, have the same respective meanings as in the act conferring the power. sub-section (2) thereof further provides that the provisions of sections 4, 4a, 6, 6a, 6b, 7, 8, 9, 10, 10a, 10c, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 19a and 28 shall mutatis mutandis apply in relation to any statutory instrument issued under any uttar pradesh act as they apply in relation to any uttar pradesh act.18. a perusal of section 20 shows that several provisions of uttar pradesh general clauses act have been made applicable in relation to statutory instruments including the statutory rules issued under any uttar pradesh act. however, section 6-c does not find place in sub-section (2) of section 20 of the u.p. general clauses act. in absence of application of section 6-c to the statutory instrument, including the statutory rule, which is the case before us, the contention of the respondents deserves to be rejected. since section 6-c of the u.p. general clauses act has not been applied to the statutory rule framed by the government of uttar pradesh, the substituted rule after it became inoperative, old rule 49 would not revive.19. for the aforesaid reasons, we are of the view that these matters deserve to be allowed.20. before we part with the case, we would like to observe that learned counsel for the appellants stated that they have paid the society commission on the basis of substituted rule or whatever they have paid towards the society commission, as per the respondents demand, they would not claim any refund of the same under such circumstances, we feel that no further order is required to be passed in that regard.21. in view of what we have stated above, the judgment an order under challenge is set aside. the appeal as well as the writ petition are allowed. there shall be no order as to costs.
1. leave granted. the high court of bombay at goa has allowed civil appeal no. 41 of 2015 filed by the respondents, set aside the order dated 29.07.2015 passed by the civil judge, senior division, panaji in civil miscellaneous application no. 38 of 2015 in inventory no. 57 of 2015 and remanded the matter back to the trial court to re-examine the matter and pass fresh orders as far as possible within a period of one week from the date of the said order. by a separate order passed by the high court on 24.08.2015, the high court has on a statement made on behalf of the respondent allowed the sealing to continue for a period often days from the date of the said order to enable the petitioner herein to approach this court for redress.2. it is in our opinion unnecessary to set out in detail the factual matrix in which the controversy arises in this appeal. all that we need mention is that civil judge senior division panaji had by his order dated 29.07.2015 allowed prayer 1(a) in part insofar the same related to enlisting of the property left behind by deceased cosme menezes. the court also allowed prayer 1(b) insofar as the same related to sealing of the office premises mentioned in the said prayer. besides the court had granted prayer ii in the application for enlisting of the articles and appointed mr. rui gomes pereira and mr. m.p. mulgaonkar, advocates as court commissioners to oversee the sealing of the premises and listing by the bailiff of the court. the sealing was to continue till the enlisting was completed. the high court has as seen above set aside the said direction primarily on the ground that the trial court had not recorded reasons for granting the prayers mentioned above and that it had also not recorded its satisfaction, that the grant of the said prayer was necessary in the interest of justice. the matter has on that basis been remanded back to the trial court to pass fresh orders on the subject.3. before us the matters were argued at some length by learned counsel for the parties but at the end of the hearing both sides agreed that the sealing of the premises which part has been completed under the orders of the civil judge could continue till such time the enlisting of the properties/documents representing valuable securities, title deed etc. left behind by deceased cosme de meneze is also completed by the two local commissioners. it was submitted that instead of local commissioners nominated by the trial court, the enlisting of the documents/properties could be entrusted to persons who are not only close relatives of the parties but who enjoy the confidence of the parties as to their fairness and independence. the parties proposed the names of cedric menezes and dale menezes in this regard. it is further agreed that no sooner the local commissioners complete the process of enlisting, the premises shall be de-sealed by the bailiff concerned and user thereof allowed to be enjoyed by the respondents. the list so prepared by the commissioners appointed by us shall then be filed before the trial court for such use and further orders as may be legally permissible. learned counsel submitted that the order passed by the high court could be modified to that limited extent.4. having given our anxious consideration, we see no reason to decline the joint prayer made before us. we accordingly direct that the sealing ordered by the civil judge of the premises referred to earlier shall continue till such time the listing of the documents is undertaken and completed by mr. cedric menezes and dale menezes, court commissioners who shall replace the local commissioners approved by the civil judge. the commissioners shall be assisted by the bailiff as the premises has been sealed by the latter under the orders of the court. the process of the opening of the seals of the premises and re-sealing by the bailiff shall continue till such time the entire exercise is duly completed. the list so prepared shall then be filed by the local/court commissioners before the trial court for such use as may be permissible in accordance with law.5. the appeal is disposed of in the above terms. we hope and trust that the local commissioners approved by this court shall spare time to undertake the work assigned to them and to complete the same as far as possible within one week from today. learned counsel for the parties submit that in the light of the agreed arrangement now made nothing further survives in i.a. no. 38 of 2015 for consideration whereof was remitted by the high court to the trial court. in that view, i.a. no. 38 of 2015 shall also stand disposed. we leave it open to the local commissioners to approach the trial court for payment of their remuneration in which event the trial court shall pass appropriate orders in accordance with law after hearing learned counsel for the parties.
j.s. khehar, j.1. leave granted.2. the appellant - m/s. adani agri fresh ltd. (hereinafter referred to as 'm/s. aafl') is a supplier of fruit and vegetables. it entered into a contractual agreement with m/s. rms fruits and company (hereinafter referred to as 'm/s. rmsfc'), a wholesale dealer in fruits, whose proprietor is one mahaboob sharif (respondent no. 1 herein). for securing payment in lieu of the products supplied by the appellant to respondent no. 1 - m/s. rmsfc, the appellant required respondent no. 1 to furnish bank guarantees, whereby the appellant would be entitled to recover the proceeds of the products, transported by it to m/s. rmsfc. three such registered bank guarantees constitute the basis of the controversy in hand.the said bank guarantees were executed by the state bank of mysore on 24.12.2010, 09.02.2011 and 10.02.2011. the terms of the bank guarantees being identical, reference to one will be sufficient for all intents and purposes. relevant clauses of the first bank guarantee are being extracted hereunder:now the guarantor hereby irrevocably and unconditionally guarantees as follows, irrespective of the validity and legal effects of the agreement, if any entered between the parties and waiving all rights of objection and defense arising there from, that the guarantor shall pay any amount up to the maximum amount of guarantee mentioned herein below, upon the aafl first demand to the aafl in the event that the whole seller fails to perform its understanding under any agreement or terms and conditions contained in the consignment order and/or sale invoice, or by any reason of whole seller failure to make the reimbursement thereof to the aafl, in time.1. the guarantee shall come into effect upon offer of delivery by the transport agent of aafl to whole seller at the invoiced address, to the whole seller account any consignment and/or sale order after the date of execution of this guarantee deed.2. the guarantor shall immediately pay at gurgaon, haryana (india) favouring m/s. adani agri fresh limited at the request of aafl, without any demur and without any recourse merely on demand standing that the amount demanded is due and payable by the whole seller to aafl.3. notwithstanding any dispute or difference at any time subsisting between whole seller and yourself concerning the supply of product mentioned above or otherwise, however and notwithstanding any suit or other proceedings that may have been instituted by either party, a sum of rs. 15,00,000/- or such lower sums or sums as may demand in writing if the said whole seller fails to pay to you the amounts due as per your record. we irrevocably agree that a certificate issued by aafl that the said sum or any part thereof if payable to you shall be accepted by us as a conclusive evidence and binding on us by such amount having become payable to you and that immediately, such a certificate is furnished by you duly signed by any of your official of senior manager or above grade payment of such demand shall be made to you by us.4. the guarantee shall not be impaired or discharged by any changes that may hereafter take place in your constitution or in the constitution of whole seller. this guarantees shall be in addition to and without prejudice to any other securities or remedies, which aafl may now have or hereafter possess and you shall be under no obligation to marshal in our favour any such security or any funds or assets that you may be entitled.5. we, the guarantor hereby waive the necessity of the aafl demanding the said debt from the whole seller before presenting us with the demand.6. aafl shall have the fullest liberty under the guarantee deed to extend, from time to time of the performance by the whole seller and that the guarantor also waives any right of notice etc., in this regard.7. notwithstanding anything contained herein:a) our liability under this bank guarantee shall not exceed rs. 15,00,000/- (rupees fifteen lakhs only);b) this bank guarantee shall be in full force until 23.12.2011.c) we are liable to pay the guaranteed amount or any part thereof under this bank guarantee only and only if the aafl seves upon us a written claim, either by way registered letter, courier, fax copy of delivered by hand by an authorized agent of the aafl and make demand there under on or before 23.12.2011.d) we further undertake and agree that this guarantee shall not be revoked during its currency except with your previous consent in writing.signature and seal of the guarantor(emphasis is ours)a perusal of the terms of the bank guarantee reveals, that the same was an unconditional guarantee, and that, the guarantor expressly waived off rights of any objection and defence, irrespective of the disputed positions adopted by the contracting parties, or even, the validity and legal effects of the contractual agreement. under the bank guarantees, the appellant - m/s. aafl would first make a demand/claim for the payment in lieu of fruits transported to respondent no. 1, and in case respondent no. 1 failed to reimburse the consideration, the appellant had the right to make a demand from the guarantor, for the above payment. actually the above stated claim of consideration from m/s. rmsfc in the first instance, was also unnecessary, in view of paragraph 5 of the bank guarantee extracted above, which clearly provides that it would not be necessary for m/s. aafl for demanding the consideration from the wholesaler - m/s. rmsfc, before presenting the demand to the guarantor - state bank of mysore. the aforesaid demand in terms of the bank guarantee was to be made on the basis of a demand/claim at the hands of m/s. aafl indicating the despatch of goods, and the amount payable in lieu thereof. thereupon,- the guarantor was to make the payment of the amount claimed, immediately without any demur, and without any recourse. on the receipt of such a certificate of the outstanding amount(s), the bank guarantee(s) would stand invoked forthwith, notwithstanding any suit or proceedings, that may have been instituted by one or the other party, with reference to the contractual obligations.3. it is the case of the appellant, that the appellant issued an "outstanding certificate" seeking payment, on account of despatch of fruit to m/s. rmsfc. the outstanding debt indicated therein was, for a sum of rs. 62,32,328/- (rupees sixty two lakhs thirty two thousand three hundred and twenty eight only). consequent upon the aforesaid demand being not honoured by respondent no. 1, the bank guarantee was sought to be invoked, through the aforesaid "outstanding certificate" dated 31.05.2011, which is being extracted hereunder:outstanding certificatethis is to certify that m/s. r.m.s. fruit & company, mysore has the outstanding debit balance of rs. 62,32,328/- (sixty two lakhs thirty two thousand three hundred twenty eight only) in our books towards supply of fruit to them during last year.thanking you,yours truly,for adani agrifresh limitedsd/-authorized signatory.4. in order to wriggle out the aforesaid bank guarantee(s), respondent no. 1 - m/s. rmsfc, filed o.s. no. 991 of 2011 before the civil judge (junior division), mysore with inter alia, the following prayer:wherefore the plaintiff humbly prays this hon'ble court be pleased to pass a judgment and decree in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants for permanent injunction, restraining 1st and 2nd defendant's bank for paying any schedule guarantee amount to the 3rd defendant, until and unless the claim of plaintiff and 3rd defendant is settled amicably or through court of law. or in the alternative restraining the 3rd defendant from receiving the said amount from the 1st and 2nd defendant bank until and unless the matter has been settled amicably or through court between plaintiff and 3rd defendant with court cost and such other appropriate reliefs as the hon'ble court deems fit to grant in the circumstances of the case in the interest of justice and equity.scheduleguarantee amount available in state bank of mysore, shivarampet branch, vinoba road, mysore guarantee no. 3/10-11 date of issue 24.12.2010 and date of expiry 23.12.2011 and extension guarantee no. 04/2010-2011 (original guarantee no. 04/2009-10) and renewed period from 10.02.2011 to 09.02.2012 and another guarantee no. 05/2010-11 and date of issue 09.02.2011 and date of expiry 08.12.2011.5. the trial court passed the following interim order after entertaining the above-said suit, on 10.08.2011:orderia no. 2 filed by the applicant/plaintiff under order xxxix rule 1 and 2 r/w section 151 of the code of civil procedure, is hereby allowed, conditionally.the defendants 1 and 2 banks are hereby restrained from making payment of schedule amount to the 3rd defendant till the disposal of the suit either amicably or judiciously between the plaintiff and the 3rd defendant subject to following conditions:(1) the plaintiff shall extend the bank guarantee executed through the defendants 1 and 2 in favour of the 3rd defendant for every six months, till disposal of the suit; after expiry of the period under the guarantee no. 5/10-11 from the period 10.2.2011 to 9.2.2012.(2) in case, the plaintiff fails in this suit, the plaintiff shall compensate the defendant no. 3 by paying interest at the rate of 18% p.a. on the total value of goods to the 3rd defendant from the date of suit till the disposal of the suit.no order as to costs.6. the aforesaid order was affirmed, by the additional senior civil judge, mysore, on a challenge raised thereto, on 13.09.2011. even the high court of karnataka, where the appellant preferred w.p. no. 4654 of 2012, did not interfere with the interim order. the order passed by the high court on 16.12.2013, dismissing the above-mentioned writ petition, is subject matter of challenge at the hands of the appellant before this court.7. as a proposition of law, learned counsel for the appellant has placed vehement reliance on a number of judgments of this court, we would refer to only two of them, which would suffice the purpose. in this behalf, reference may first be made to u.p. cooperative federation ltd. v. singh consultants and engineers (p) ltd. manu/sc/0021/1987manu/sc/0021/1987 : (1988) 1 scc 174, where-from our attention was invited to the following observations:27. our attention was also drawn to the judgment of the learned single judge of the madras high court in arul murugan traders v. rashtriya chemicals and fertilizers ltd. bombay and anr. manu/tn/0171/1986manu/tn/0171/1986 : a.i.r. 1986 madras 161 where the learned single judge expressed the opinion that there was no absolute rule prohibiting grant of interim injunction relating to bank guarantees and in exceptional case courts would interfere with the machinery of irrevocable obligations assumed by banks, and that the plaintiff must establish a prima facie case, meaning thereby that there is a bona fide contention between the parties or serious question to be tried, and further the balance of convenience was also a relevant factor. if the element of fraud exists, then courts step in to prevent one of the parties to the contract from deriving unjust enrichment by invoking bank guarantee. in that case the learned single judge came to the conclusion that the suit involved serious questions to be tried and particularly relating to the plea of fraud, which was a significant factor to be taken into account and claim for interdicting the enforcement of bank guarantee should have been allowed.28. i am, however, of the opinion that these observations must be strictly considered in the light of the principle enunciated. it is not the decision that there should be a prima facie case. in order to restrain the operation either of irrevocable letter of credit or of confirmed letter of credit or of bank guarantee, there should be serious dispute and there should be good prima facie case of fraud and special equities in the form of preventing irretrievable injustice between the parties. otherwise the very purpose of bank guarantees would be negatived and the fabric of trading operation will get jeopardised.xxx xxx xxx43. the argument for the respondent is attractive but it seems to overlook the basic nature of the case. the basic nature of the case relates to the obligations assumed by the bank under the guarantees given to upcof ltd. if under law, the bank cannot be prevented by sce (p) ltd. from honouring the credit guarantees, the upcof ltd. also cannot be restrained from invoking the guarantees. what applies to the bank must equally apply to upcof ltd. therefore, the frame of the suit by not impleading the bank cannot make any difference in the position of law. equally, it would he futile to contend that the court was justified in granting the injunction since it has found a prima facie case in favour of the sce(p) ltd. the question of examining the prima facie case or balance of convenience does not arise if the court cannot interfere with the unconditional commitment made by the bank in the guarantees in question.xxx xxx xxx54. the court, however, should not lightly interfere with the operation of irrevocable documentary credit. i agree with my learned brother that in order to restrain the operation of the irrevocable letter of credit, performance bond or guarantee, there should be serious dispute to be tried and there should be a good prima facie acts of fraud. as sir john donaldson m.r. said in bolivinter oil sa v. chase manhattan bank and ors. (1984) 1 all e.r. 351 at 352:the wholly exceptional case where an injunction may be granted is where it is proved that the bank knows that any demand for payment already made or which may thereafter be made will clearly be fraudulent. but the evidence must be clear, both as to the fact of fraud and as to the bank's knowledge. it would certainly not normally be sufficient that this rests on the uncorroborated statement of the customer, for irreparable damage can be done to a bank's credit in the relatively brief time which must elapse between the granting of such an injunction and an application by the bank to have it discharged."55. from the above discussion, what appears to me is this: the sound banking system may, however require more caution in the issuance of irrevocable documentary credits. it would be for the banks to safeguard themselves by other means and generally not for the court to come to their rescue with injunctions unless there is established fraud. in the result, this appeal must be allowed. the judgment and order of the allahabad high court dated february 20, 1987 must be set aside and the order of learned civil judge, lucknow dated august 8, 1986 restored.(emphasis is ours)8. reliance was also placed on vinitec electronics private ltd. v. hcl infosystems ltd. manu/sc/8095/2007manu/sc/8095/2007 : (2008) 1 scc 544. the following observations have been recorded in the above judgment:11. the law relating to invocation of bank guarantees is by now well settled by a catena of decisions of this court. the bank guarantees which provided that they are payable by the guarantor on demand is considered to be an un-conditional bank guarantee. when in the course of commercial dealings, unconditional guarantees have been given or accepted the beneficiary is entitled to realize such a bank guarantee in terms thereof irrespective of any pending disputes. in u.p. state sugar corporation v. sumac international ltd., this court observed that:12. the law relating to invocation of such bank guarantees is by now well settled. when in the course of commercial dealings an unconditional bank guarantee is given or accepted, the beneficiary is entitled to realize such a bank guarantee in terms thereof irrespective of any pending disputes. the bank giving such a guarantee is bound to honour it as per its terms irrespective of any dispute raised by its customer. the very purpose of giving such a bank guarantee would otherwise be defeated. the courts should, therefore, be slow in granting an injunction to restrain the realization of such a bank guarantee. the courts have carved out only two exceptions. a fraud in connection with such a bank guarantee would vitiate the very foundation of such a bank guarantee. hence if there is such a fraud of which the beneficiary seeks to take advantage, he can be restrained from doing so. the second exception relates to cases where allowing the encashment of an unconditional bank guarantee would result in irretrievable harm or injustice to one of the parties concerned. since in most cases payment of money under such a bank guarantee would adversely affect the bank and its customer at whose instance the guarantee is given, the harm or injustice contemplated under this head must be of such an exceptional and irretrievable nature as would override the terms of the guarantee and the adverse effect of such an injunction on commercial dealings in the country. the two grounds are not necessarily connected, though both may coexist in some cases.12. it is equally well settled in law that bank guarantee is an independent contract between bank and the beneficiary thereof. the bank is always obliged to honour its guarantee as long as it is an unconditional and irrevocable one. the dispute between the beneficiary and the party at whose instance the bank has given the guarantee is immaterial and of no consequence. in bses limited v. fenner india ltd. this court held:10. there are, however, two exceptions to this rule. the first is when there is a clear fraud of which the bank has notice and a fraud of the beneficiary from which it seeks to benefit. the fraud must be of an egregious nature as to vitiate the entire underlying transaction. the second exception to the general rule of non-intervention is when there are 'special equities' in favour of injunction, such as when 'irretrievable injury' or 'irretrievable injustice' would occur if such an injunction were not granted. the general rule and its exceptions has been reiterated in so many judgments of this court, that in u.p. state sugar corporation v. sumac international ltd. manu/sc/0380/1997manu/sc/0380/1997 : (1997) 1 scc 568 (hereinafter 'u.p. state sugar corpn') this court, correctly declare that the law was 'settled'.13. in himadri chemicals industries ltd. v. coal tar refining co., this court summarized the principles for grant of refusal to grant of injunction to restrain the enforcement of a bank guarantee or a letter of credit in the following manner:14....(i) while dealing with an application for injunction in the course of commercial dealings, and when an unconditional bank guarantee or letter of credit is given or accepted, the beneficiary is entitled to realize such a bank guarantee or a letter of credit in terms thereof irrespective of any pending disputes relating to the terms of the contract.(ii) the bank giving such guarantee is bound to honour it as per its terms irrespective of any dispute raised by its customer.(iii) the courts should be slow in granting an order of injunction to restrain the realization of a bank guarantee or a letter of credit.(iv) since a bank guarantee or a letter of credit is an independent and a separate contract and is absolute in nature, the existence of any dispute between the parties to the contract is not a ground for issuing an order of injunction to restrain enforcement of bank guarantees or letters of credit.(v) fraud of an egregious nature which would vitiate the very foundation of such a bank guarantee or letter of credit and the beneficiary seeks to take advantage of the situation.(vi) allowing encashment of an unconditional bank guarantee or a letter of credit would result in irretrievable harm or injustice to one of the parties concerned.14. in mahatama gandhi sahakra sakkare karkhane v. national heavy engg. coop. ltd. and anr., this court observed:if the bank guarantee furnished is an unconditional and irrevocable one, it is not open to the bank to raise any objection whatsoever to pay the amounts under the guarantee. the person in whose favour the guarantee is furnished by the bank cannot be prevented by way of an injunction from enforcing the guarantee on the pretext that the condition for enforcing the bank guarantee in terms of the agreement entered into between the parties has not been fulfilled. such a course is impermissible. the seller cannot raise the dispute of whatsoever nature and prevent the purchaser from enforcing the bank guarantee by way of injunction except on the ground of fraud and irretrievable injury.what is relevant are the terms incorporated in the guarantee executed by the bank. on careful analysis of the terms and conditions of the guarantee in the present case, it is found that the guarantee is an unconditional one. the respondent, therefore, cannot be allowed to raise any dispute and prevent the appellant from encashing the bank guarantee. the mere fact that the bank guarantee refers to the principle agreement without referring to any specific clause in the preamble of the deed of guarantee does not make the guarantee furnished by the bank to be a conditional one.xxx xxx xxx24. the next question that falls for our consideration is as to whether the present case falls under any of or both the exceptions, namely, whether there is a clear fraud of which the bank has notice and a fraud of the beneficiary from which it seeks to benefit and another exception whether there are any "special equities" in favour of granting injunction.25. this court in more than one decision took the view that fraud, if any, must be of an egregious nature as to vitiate the underlying transaction. we have meticulously examined the pleadings in the present case in which no factual foundation is laid in support of the allegation of fraud. there is not even a proper allegation of any fraud as such and in fact the whole case of the appellant centers around the allegation with regard to the alleged breach of contract by the respondent. the plea of fraud in the appellants own words is to the following effect:that despite the respondent, hcl being in default of not making payment as stipulated in the bank guarantee, in perpetration of abject dishonesty and fraud, the respondent, hcl fraudulently invoked the bank guarantee furnished by the applicant and sought remittance of the sums under the conditional bank guarantee from the oriental bank of commerce vide letter of invocation dated 16.12.2003.26. in our considered opinion such vague and indefinite allegations made do not satisfy the requirement in law constituting any fraud much less the fraud of an egregious nature as to vitiate the entire transaction. the case, therefore does not fall within the first exception.27. whether encashment of the bank guarantee would cause any "irretrievable injury" or "irretrievable injustice". there is no plea of any special equities by the appellant in its favour. so far as the plea of "irretrievable injustice" is concerned the appellant in its petition merely stated:that should the respondent be successful in implementing its evil design, the same would not only amount to fraud, cause irretrievable injustice to the applicant, and render the arbitration nugatory and infructuous but would permit the respondent to take an unfair advantage of their own wrong at the cost and extreme prejudice of the applicant.(emphasis is ours)9. based on the judgments rendered by this court more particularly, the judgments referred to hereinabove, it was the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the appellant, that the terms and conditions of a "deed of guarantee" could not be injuncted from being given effect to, on the basis of the principle adopted in determining "prima facie case", "balance of convenience" and "irreparable loss", which are the usual parameters on the basis whereof injunctions are granted. insofar as the injunction of an unconditional bank guarantee is concerned, it was submitted, that the same could be granted only if the court was satisfied about the commission of a flagrant fraud, at the hands of one or the other contracting parties, or alternatively if the court was satisfied that an irreparable injury or some irretrievable injustice would be caused to the concerned party.10. insofar as the present controversy is concerned, the defence of respondent no. 1 is entirely based on a communication dated 14.01.2011, stated to have been addressed by the appellant to respondent no. 1. the aforesaid communication, which constitutes the basis of the defence of respondent no. 1, is extracted hereunder:adaniagrifresh limited14th january, 2011tomr. mahaboob shariff,m/s. r.m.s. fruits & company,# 1875, anesarui street,behind deveraja market,mysore 50 001sub: settlement of amountsir,we inform you that, our settlement talk held at mysore, regarding destroyed and damage of 8 (eight) loads of apples supplied to you, four firm agreed to receive 1/4th value of total value. hence, you are directed to send the amount in installments as agreed after we supplying apple load as earlier.sincerely yours,sd/-authorised signatoryseal.in addition to the relying on the above communication (dated 14.01.2011), it was the vehement contention of the learned counsel representing respondent no. 1 that respondent no. 1 - m/s. rmsfc had tendered and enclosed photographs depicting rotten and damaged apples, which were allegedly despatched by the appellant to respondent no. 1. it was the submission of the learned counsel for respondent no. 1, that the veracity of the aforesaid photographs, was not disputed by the appellant, before the trial court.11. it is not possible for us to determine the veracity or truthfulness of the defence raised by respondent no. 1. the aforesaid shall emerge only on the culmination of the proceedings initiated by respondent no. 1 before the civil court. at the present juncture, we are only concerned with the injunction of the three bank guarantees, referred to hereinabove, the invocation whereof was injuncted, not only by the trial court, but also by the appellate court, and the same was thereafter maintained even by the high court.12. during the course of hearing, learned counsel for the appellant candidly submitted, that the communication dated 14.01.2011 relied upon by respondent no. 1 in its defence, is a fabricated and doctored document, which was never executed by the appellant. the position adopted by the rival parties lead us to record the following conclusions. firstly, that the concerned bank guarantees, are clearly unconditional. this is apparent from the extracts thereof, reproduced above. secondly, the veracity and truthfulness of defence of respondent no. 1 - m/s rmsfc, based on the communication dated 14.01.2011, cannot be opined on at the present juncture, and will have to await the final outcome of the civil suit filed by m/s. rmsfc at mysore. thirdly, m/s. rmsfc has not levelled any allegations of the commission of a flagrant fraud by m/s. aafl, for engineering the invocation of the bank guarantees executed by the state bank of mysore. fourthly, no submissions have been advanced on behalf of m/s. rmsfc to establish, that the invocation of the bank guarantees would lead to an irreparable injury or some irretrievable injustice. the instant eventuality is therefore ruled out.13. in deciding the present controversy, we will therefore have to adopt the principles laid down by this court in u.p. cooperative federation ltd. v. singh consultants and engineers (p) ltd. (supra), and in vinitec electronics private ltd. v. hcl infosystems ltd. (supra). having given our thoughtful consideration to the law laid down by this court, in respect of grant/refusal of an injunction of an unconditional bank guarantee, and keeping in mind the terms and conditions, more particularly of the contractual conditions extracted and narrated above, we are satisfied that the courts below were not justified in injuncting the invocation of the three bank guarantees, executed by the state bank of mysore, at the instance of m/s. rmsfc. we accordingly hereby direct respondent nos. 2 and 3 - the state bank of mysore to honour the same forthwith.14. while accepting the claim raised by the appellant as has been recorded by us in our conclusions hereinabove, it is also imperative for us to record, that we had required the learned counsel representing the appellant, to obtain instructions from the appellant, whether or not the appellant was truthful in describing the communication dated 14.01.2011 as fabricated and doctored. in case, the appellant had accepted it to be genuine, we would have permitted the bank guarantees to be invoked, for the reimbursement of 1/4th of the total value of the goods, in consonance with the communication dated 14.01.2011. having obtained instructions, learned counsel for the appellant states, that the express and specific stance of the appellant, that the communication dated 14.01.2011 (extracted above) is actually fabricated and doctored, and was never sent or executed by the appellant - m/s. aafl to respondent no. 1 - m/s. rmsfc. in view of the position adopted by the appellant on express instructions, we consider it just and appropriate to further record, that in case the statement made to this court on behalf of the appellant is not found to be correct, on the culmination of the proceedings initiated by respondent no. 1, it shall be open to respondent no. 1 - m/s. rmsfc to initiate civil and criminal proceedings against the appellant, as may be permissible in accordance with law.15. we are satisfied in granting liberty to respondent no. 1 -m/s. rmsfc, to suitably amend the plaint, so as to mould the relief in order to claim whatsoever is due to respondent no. 1, under the contractual obligations with the appellant, in consonance with law.16. the appeal is disposed of in the above terms.
j.s. khehar, j.1. it is not a matter of dispute, that the conditions of service including the manner and method of determining seniority in the cadre of sub-inspectors of police, in the state of andhra pradesh, are regulated by the andhra pradesh police (civil) subordinate service rules (hereinafter referred to as, the service rules), notified on 26.8.1959, read with the special rules notified on 14.12.1990. learned counsel for the rival parties are agreed, that the issue of seniority (which is the pointed issue of dispute between the rival parties in the present appeals), is to be determined under rule 15 of the said rules, which is extracted hereunder:15. "seniority: (a) the seniority of a person in the class or category or grade shall, unless he has been reduced to lower rank as a punishment be determined by the date of his first appointment to such class or category or grade. if any portion of the service of such person does not count towards his probation under the general rules his seniority shall be determined by the date of commencement of his service which counts towards probation:provided that in the case of sub-inspectors, sub-inspectors of police (intelligence) and reserve sub-inspectors, the seniority inter se shall be fixed on completion of training in the police training college or with the andhra pradesh special police, as the case may be, instead of at the time of selection in accordance with the list which shall be arranged in order of merit, which shall be determined in accordance with the aggregate of marks obtained by each probationer-(i) in respect of his record in the police training college or with the andhra pradesh special police, as the case may be; and(ii) at the final examination.in determining such order of merit, no account shall be taken of marks awarded to a probationer in any subject in which he has failed. but such seniority shall be liable to revision by the deputy inspector general of police concerned if he considers it necessary, before completion of probation.this sub-rule shall not affect the seniority of any members of the service which may have been fixed expressly or by implication before the 19th november, 1941 or any orders as to seniority which may have been passed by competent authority before the 19th november, 1941.provided that in the case of directly recruited sub-inspectors of police (intelligence) the inter se seniority shall be fixed on completion of training the police training college/andhra pradesh police academy, instead of at the time of selection, in accordance with the list which shall be arranged in order of merit, which shall be determined in accordance with the aggregate of marks obtained by each probationer in the tests and examinations prescribed for them in the training modules conducted at these institutions.the seniority of the sub-inspectors of police (intelligence) appointed by transfer from among sub-inspectors of police (civil) or equivalent ranks of this service carrying the same scale of pay shall not be treated as first appointment but shall be determined with reference to the date of his seniority in the class or category from which he was transferred.provided also that the inter se seniority of the sub-inspectors selected from among the reserve sub-inspectors of armed reserve and andhra pradesh special police battalions by transfer shall be fixed in the order of merit for each range (zone) separately based on the aggregate marks obtained by them in the final examination conducted at police training college at the end of six months training. in determining such order of merit, the marks secured in the failed subjects need not be taken into account.(b) the appointing authority may, at the time of passing an order appointing two or more persons simultaneously to a class or category fix for any reason the order of preference among them; and where such order has been fixed, seniority shall be determined in accordance with it.(c) the transfer of a person from one class or category of the service to another class or category carrying the same pay or scale of pay shall not be treated as first appointment to the latter for purposes of seniority and the seniority of person so transferred shall be determined with reference to the date of his first appointment to class or category from which he was transferred. where any difficulty or doubt arises in applying this sub-rule, seniority shall be determined by the appointing authority.(d) where a member of the service in any class, category or grade is reduced to a lower class, category or grade, he shall be placed at the top of the ladder unless the authority ordering such reduction directs that he shall take rank in such lower class, category or grade next below any special member thereof.(e) the seniority of qualified special policemen appointed by transfer as constables in this service shall be determined by the date of their first appointment in this service for purposes of confirmation in vacancies in this service.(f) the seniority of the prohibition staff absorbed in this service shall be determined on the basis of their pay fixed with reference to fundamental rules 22 and 31, in the service:provided that the inter-se seniority of these at the same stage of the time scales of pay of the service will be determined by the dates on which they began to draw pay at that stage; andprovided further that no member of the excise and prohibition department will, on appointment to this service, be senior to any member of the service who has put in the same or more period of service than himself.in the case of members of such ranks in the excise and prohibition department, the scales of pay of which correspond to the scales of pay of the ranks of this service, the date of their first appointment in the excise and prohibition department shall determine the seniority.insofar as the above rule is concerned, the further admitted position is, that the inter se seniority between the rival parties is liable to be determined in terms of the first proviso to rule 15(a) extracted above.2. before venturing into the determination of the inter se seniority between the rival parties, it is necessary in the first instance, to delineate the factual position. we shall accordingly hereinafter, in the first instance, narrate the factual position, as it emerges from the pleadings, as also, from the different orders appended to the instant batch of civil appeals.3. the police department of the state of andhra pradesh decided to fill up existing posts of sub-inspector of police by way of direct recruitment. the andhra pradesh state level recruitment board (hereinafter referred to as, the recruitment board) undertook the aforesaid exercise by issuing a notification dated 22.1.1991. as per the said notification, 470 posts of sub-inspector, in 7 different zones were sought to be filled up. the process of selection from amongst eligible candidates, was to be based on a physical test followed by a written test and an interview. having concluded the aforesaid selection process, lists of provisionally selected candidates were prepared on the basis of their inter se merit in the selection process, for each of the 7 zones. while disposing of the present controversy, we have chosen to pass a common order, wherein we shall take into consideration the vacancies sought to be filled up for zone v (warangal range). in this behalf, it would be relevant to mention here, that the office of the director general & inspector general of police, andhra pradesh, hyderabad, issued a communication dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991 indicating the names of provisionally selected candidates for zone v (warangal range). a list of candidates was attached to the aforesaid communication, depicting the provisional list of selected candidates for the above range. this list comprised of 38 names from the open category, 5 names from the backward class 'a' category, 7 names from the backward class 'b' category, 1 name from the backward class 'c' category, 5 names from the backward class 'd' category, 11 names from the scheduled castes category, 4 names from the scheduled tribes category, 2 names from the ex-servicemen category, 6 names from among the police executives, 1 name from the ministerial service, and 1 name from amongst the sportsmen.4. on 12.7.1991, the afore-stated candidates were directed to report for training. only 58 of the selected candidates, however, reported for training. the rest of the candidates did not join for a variety of reasons. it is not a matter of dispute, that there are two police training colleges in the state of andhra pradesh, and accordingly, the afore-stated selected candidates were deputed for training to the said two training colleges. the order dated 12.7.1991 vide which the short-listed candidates were deputed for training reveals, that the candidates were placed on probation from the date of joining the police training college(s). the training would continue for a period of nine months followed by practical training for one year and three months, including holding independent charge of a police station for not less than nine months. the said training was to commence from 16.7.1991.5. all the 58 selected candidates except one munuswamy, successfully completed their training. insofar as munuswamy is concerned, he did not participate in the examination at the end of the training, due to personal reasons. munuswamy was allowed to enroll himself for training along with a batch of candidates who were deputed for training on 14.6.1992. munuswamy also completed his training with the said subsequent batch of candidates, in 1993.6. it is relevant to mention, that in the statutory provision regulating appointments against the cadre of sub-inspectors of police, 50% of the posts are earmarked to be filled up by way of direct recruitment, 30% of the posts are to be filled up by promotion from head constables, 7% from amongst police executives (hereinafter referred to as, pe) out of the constables and head constables, 4% from police ministerial staff (hereinafter referred to, as pm), 2% from sportspersons (hereinafter referred to as, sp), not more than 5% by way of transfer from reserve sub-inspectors (from armed reserve/andhra pradesh special police) and 2% by way of appointment under special circumstances, on compassionate grounds.7. original application no. 29957 of 1991 came to be filed before the andhra pradesh administrative tribunal at hyderabad (hereinafter referred to as, the administrative tribunal), questioning the validity of the determination of the different quotas of recruitment in the aforementioned notification dated 22.1.1991. while determining the above controversy, the administrative tribunal arrived at the conclusion, that except the quota of promotion from head constables (30%), by transfer of reserve sub-inspectors of police (armed reserve/andhra pradesh special police) (5%) and appointments under special circumstances on compassionate grounds (2%), the remaining 3% quota has to be filled up by direct recruitment. the administrative tribunal thereupon concluded, that the direct recruitment quota, had been incorrectly determined for all the 7 zones, for which the selection had been made (in furtherance of the notification dated 22.1.1991). accordingly, the administrative tribunal vide its order dated 30.7.1991, directed the authorities to recalculate the vacancies under the pe, pm and sp quotas for all the ranges, and to make appointments in furtherance of the selection process initiated through the notification dated 22.1.1991.8. in obedience to the aforesaid directions, after recalculating the vacancies for pe, pm and sp quotas, additional names of candidates were sent for training. these candidates commenced their training on 14.6.1992. they completed their training in 1993. it is pertinent to record here, that the candidate whose training was deferred, namely, munuswamy, and the candidates whose names were short-listed for training in furtherance of the directions issued by the administrative tribunal vide order dated 30.7.1991 (passed in original application no. 29957 of 1991), commenced the course of training simultaneously on 14.6.1992.9. we have recorded hereinabove, that out of the names of candidates provisionally selected for zone v (warangal range), only 58 candidates had reported for training. the state government took a conscious decision to depute for purpose of training, further candidates equal to the number of candidates who did not join training. as such, 10 more candidates who had participated in the process of selection, initiated through the notification dated 22.1.1991, and were placed immediately below the selected candidates as per the first list (deputed for training vide letter dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991), were sent for training. these candidates were also sent for training to the two police training colleges in the state of andhra pradesh. these additional candidates also commenced training on 14.6.1992, i.e., in the same batch along with the aforementioned munuswamy, as also, the candidates who came to be deputed in furtherance of the order passed by the administrative tribunal in original application no. 29957 of 1991.10. the competent authority, namely, the deputy inspector general of police, warangal, vide a memorandum dated 17.1.1996, issued a seniority list of sub-inspectors of police, zone v (warangal range). the said seniority list included the names of the original 58 sub-inspectors of police (out of the 80 selected for the said zone), who had completed their training in june, 1992. it is also necessary to reflect the negative position, namely, the abovementioned seniority list did not include the name of munuswamy, who did not complete the training along with the 58 candidates who had joined training in furtherance of their provisional selection vide letter dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991. the above seniority list also did not include the names of those selected and appointed in furtherance of the notification dated 22.1.1991, consequent upon the determination of the administrative tribunal, that the quota of vacancies from pe, pm and sp, had wrongly been determined. the abovesaid seniority list, did not include the names of those candidates, who had been selected in furtherance of the notification dated 22.1.1991, for the sole reason, that some of the candidates who had been selected (and appointed), had failed to join the police training college(s) (in furtherance of their provisional selection, vide letter dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991).11. it is apparent from the factual position noticed hereinabove, that consequent upon the selection process conducted in furtherance of the notification dated 22.1.1991, the selected candidates were deputed for training in two batches. the training of the first batch commenced on 15.7.1991, whereas, the training of the second batch commenced on 14.6.1992. some of those candidates, who commenced their training on 14.6.1992, approached the administrative tribunal, by filing original application no. 5165 of 2002, assailing the action of the authorities in not including their names in the seniority list dated 17.1.1996, wherein only the names of 58 candidates, who had joined training on 15.7.1991 were reflected. in fact, names of none of the candidates who had commenced training on 14.6.1992 were reflected in the aforesaid seniority list. the administrative tribunal disposed of original application no. 5165 of 2002 vide an order dated 11.6.2002. the ultimate directions issued in the aforesaid order are being extracted hereunder:in view of the matter, the applicants are directed to make a detailed representation to the director general and inspector general of police putting forth their complete case, and the director general and inspector general of police is directed to dispose of the representation of the applicants preferably, before making promotions to the posts of inspector of police in zone-iv.in obedience to the directions issued by the administrative tribunal on 11.6.2002, those candidates, who had been selected consequent upon the issuance of the notification dated 22.1.1991, but had commenced their training at the police training college(s) on 14.6.1992, submitted a detailed representation wherein they asserted, that their names ought to have been interspersed with the candidates who had commenced their training with effect from 15.7.1991. the above claim was premised on rule 15 (extracted at the beginning of the instant judgment). the director general & inspector general of police, on receipt of the representation, sought the following clarification from the principal secretary to the government of andhra pradesh, vide letter dated 21.1.2003:whether the seniority of sis (civil) though selected on the notification for 1991 batch but appointed and underwent basic training during 1992 can be fixed alongwith 1991 batch of sis (civil) as they were selected as per the notification issued in the year 1991.a perusal of the clarification sought reveals, that the real intent behind seeking the aforesaid clarification was, whether the candidates selected in furtherance of the notification dated 22.1.1991, were to be treated as candidates belonging to a single batch, or whether, they were to be treated as two batches, on the basis of the different dates of commencing training (the first batch on 15.7.1991, and the second batch on 14.6.1992). simply stated, the question posed was whether the selected candidates (in furtherance of the notification dated 22.1.1991) were to be treated as a single batch for the year 1991. or alternatively, they were to be treated as two batches, one of the year 1991 (i.e., in respect of candidates deputed for training on 15.7.1991) and the second of the year 1992 (i.e., in respect of candidates deputed for training on 14.6.1992). the government of andhra pradesh issued a memorandum dated 17.3.2003, in compliance of the order dated 11.6.2002 (passed by the administrative tribunal while disposing of original application no. 5165 of 2002), and in reply to the letter dated 21.1.2003 (issued by the director general & inspector general of police, andhra pradesh, seeking clarification with reference to the inter se seniority of the parties in dispute). vide its memorandum dated 17.3.2003, the state government accepted delay at its hands, in not deputing the selected candidates from the pe, pm and sp quotas for training, due to a wrong calculation of the vacancies. having accepted delay at its own hands, the state government was of the view, that the candidates sent for training belatedly (who had commenced their training at the concerned police training college with effect from 14.6.1992), were entitled to seniority along with those deputed for training on 15.7.1991. this, according to the state government, would have to be achieved by interspersing the candidates deputed for the training courses on 15.7.1991 and 14.6.1992, by taking into consideration the aggregate marks obtained by them, at the end of their training at the police training college(s). it is, therefore apparent, that the state government accepted the contention of the candidates deputed for training on 14.6.1992 (namely, the applicants who had approached the administrative tribunal by filing original application no. 5165 of 2002). this position was adopted by the state government on account of the fact, that the candidates were selected through a common process (initiated by the recruitment board vide notification dated 22.1.1991).12. the claim of the candidates, whose names were included in the list of provisionally selected candidates, issued on 11.4.1991/7.5.1991 was, that they were higher in the merit list, vis--vis candidates who were deputed for training on 14.6.1992, and as such, those deputed for training vide letter dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991 should be treated as a batch separate and distinct, from the batch of candidates who were deputed for training on 14.6.1992. the 58 candidates, whose names were included in the letter dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991, and who were exclusively placed in the seniority list dated 17.1.1996, filed detailed objections to the determination rendered by the state government vide its order/memorandum dated 17.3.2003. the state government vide its order dated 26.12.2003, rejected the objections filed by the candidates deputed for training on 15.7.1991. in sum and substance, the claim of the candidates, who were deputed for training on 15.7.1991, that they should be placed en-masse above the candidates deputed for training on 14.6.1992, in the seniority list, came to be rejected. accordingly vide order dated 13.9.2004, the state government issued a memorandum concluding, that the candidates deputed for training on 14.6.1992 were entitled to be interspersed in the seniority list, along with the candidates who were deputed for training on 15.7.1991. in sum and substance, the state government concluded, that those selected in continuation of the notification dated 22.1.1991, by the recruitment board, were entitled to be depicted in a combined/common seniority list, prepared in consonance with rule 15 reproduced above.13. the different orders passed by the state government referred to in the foregoing two paragraphs, whereby it had concluded, that the candidates deputed for training on 15.7.1991 were liable to be infused for purposes of seniority, with candidates deputed for training on 14.6.1992, were assailed by the former, through a bunch of original applications filed before the administrative tribunal. the afore-stated batch of original applications came to be dismissed by the administrative tribunal vide order dated 24.9.2004. the applicants before the administrative tribunal, therefore, approached the high court of judicature, andhra pradesh at hyderabad (hereinafter referred to as, the high court), by filing a series of writ petitions. the writ petitions came to be dismissed by the high court by a common order dated 8.2.2005. the determination by the high court in upholding the orders passed by the state government, as also, the orders passed by the administrative tribunal, are subject matter of challenge in the instant batch of appeals. since the issue, which is subject matter of challenge is common, we propose to dispose of the same by a common order in the same fashion, as the controversy was determined originally by the administrative tribunal, and subsequently, by the high court.14. the solitary issue that arises for consideration at our hands is, whether the candidates selected in furtherance of the notification dated 22.1.1991, issued by the recruitment board, constitute one batch. or whether, they constitute two batches of candidates, based on the separate dates, when they were deputed for training. the contention advanced at the hands of the learned counsel for the appellants before this court was, that the selected candidates are liable to be treated as two batches of candidates. the first batch, according to the appellants, was the batch of candidates deputed for training on 15.7.1991. and the second batch, according to the appellants, would comprise of candidates who were deputed for training on 14.6.1992.15. as against the challenge raised at the hands of the appellants, through their learned counsel, it was the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents, that only one selection process was conducted in furtherance of the notification dated 22.1.1991, by the recruitment board. out of the same selection list, candidates were deputed for training firstly on 15.7.1991 and thereafter, on 14.6.1992. it was the submission of the learned counsel representing the private respondents, and supported by the learned counsel representing the state of andhra pradesh, that bifurcation of candidates into two different trainee groups, would not result in their being described as two batches of candidates. the submission was, that all these candidates having been selected for appointment, in furtherance of a common selection process conducted by the recruitment board, they were liable to be treated as a single batch of candidates.16. we will venture to determine the controversy in hand, by adopting a three-step consideration process. we shall thereupon record our conclusion.consideration, one:we shall, in the first instance, examine the seniority position only with respect to munuswamy. the name of munuswamy was included in the list of selected candidates issued by the director general & inspector general of police, andhra pradesh, hyderabad, vide letter dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991. it is not a matter of dispute, that the aforesaid munuswamy was originally deputed for training at the police training college on 15.7.1991. munuswamy, however, could not complete his training on account of the fact, that he did not participate in the examination conducted at the end of the training, due to personal reasons. the aforesaid munuswamy was allowed to complete his training, along with the batch of candidates deputed for training in the succeeding batch, on 14.6.1992. the above factual position, which was duly taken into consideration by the administrative tribunal, and by the high court, was not disputed during the course of hearing before us. the question which arises for our consideration is, whether munuswamy would be entitled to be included in the seniority list, along with the batch of candidates, with whom he was originally deputed for training on 15.7.1991, or with the batch of candidates who were deputed for training thereafter, on 14.6.1992. having given our thoughtful consideration, and keeping in mind the basic principle underlying the relevant proviso to rule 15 (extracted at the beginning of this judgment), we are of the considered view, that the mandate for the determination of seniority under the aforesaid proviso is to the following effect. firstly, inter se seniority of sub-inspectors of police is not to be determined in accordance with the merit list drawn up, "at the time of their selection". and secondly, inter se seniority of sub-inspectors of police has to be determined on the basis of "the aggregate of marks obtained by each probationer", "at the final examination" on the conclusion of their training, at the police training college(s). insofar as the aforesaid munuswamy is concerned, it is not open to the candidates deputed for training in the first instance to contend, that though munuswamy's name was included in the list of provisionally selected candidates issued on 11.4.1991/7.5.1991, his seniority ought to be determined along with the candidates deputed for training later. it is apparent, that insofar as the munuswamy is concerned, since his name was included amongst the names of candidates provisionally selected as sub-inspectors of police vide letter dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991, those deputed for training vide the same letter (dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991) can not be permitted to contend, that his seniority cannot be determined alongwith them. the above mentioned course, suggested by the learned counsel for the appellants, is not open, because the same would give primacy to something beyond the purview of the proviso to the rule in question. we have no doubt in our mind, that munuswamy, must figure in the seniority list along with those deputed for training on 15.7.1991, for the simple reason, that his name existed in the list of names (including the appellants), deputed for training vide letter dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991. there can, therefore be no doubt whatsoever, that insofar as munuswamy is concerned, even though he completed his training in the course which commenced from 14.6.1992, his position in the inter se seniority list was bound to be reflected alongwith those with whom he was deputed for training, according to the aggregate of marks obtained by him, on the completion of his training at the police training college, in terms of rule 15.consideration, two:insofar as this step is concerned, we shall exclusively take into consideration the manner of determination of seniority of candidates appointed as sub-inspectors of police, against the vacancies belonging to the pe, pm and sp quotas, consequent upon the directions issued by the administrative tribunal, dated 30.7.1991 (while disposing of original application no. 29957 of 1991). in this behalf, it is relevant to mention, that the vacancies falling to each of the aforesaid quotas, was found to have been incorrectly determined by the state government, while making appointments in furtherance of the notification dated 22.1.1991. the administrative tribunal accordingly, directed the state government, to re-calculate the strength of the said quotas, and to make appointments. it is not a matter of dispute, that consequent upon the determination of the administrative tribunal, the quotas with reference to the aforesaid cadres, which had wrongly been determined, for each of the zones, were re-calculated. the state government on re-calculation of the vacancy position, with reference to the pe, pm and sp quotas, appointed candidates from the aforesaid quotas, out of the selection process conducted by the recruitment board, in furtherance of the notification dated 22.1.1991. thereupon, they were deputed for training on 14.6.1992. it is, therefore apparent, that had the quotas been correctly determined by the state government, these candidates would have been originally appointed along with others, when the letter dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991 was issued by the director general & inspector general of police, andhra pradesh, hyderabad. in the above eventuality, they would have been deputed for training in the very first instance on 15.7.1991. for no fault of theirs, despite their selection in the same recruitment process, which was conducted in furtherance of the notification dated 22.1.1991, they were deputed for training on 14.6.1992. the delay in deputing the candidates belonging to pe, pm and sp quotas, squarely falls on the appointing authority, and not on the candidates who were subsequently deputed for training from the pe, pm and sp quotas. for exactly the same reason, as had been depicted under "consideration, one" above, we are of the view, that those deputed for training against the pe, pm and sp quotas on 14.6.1992, being not in any manner responsible for their not having been deputed along with the originally selected candidates on 15.7.1991, are liable to a fixation in the seniority list, in exactly the same manner as munuswamy. this is liable to be done in terms of the mandate of the relevant proviso to rule 15 aforementioned, by interspersing them along with those included in the original seniority list, by determining their position on the basis of the aggregate marks obtained by them, in the final examination, at the conclusion of their training at the police training college(s).consideration, three:in "consideration, one" and "consideration, two" above, we have concluded, that even though the appointees in question were deputed for training on 14.6.1992, their seniority had to be determined alongwith the candidates who had been deputed for training on 15.7.1991. we shall now endeavour to consider the manner of fixing inter se seniority of the candidates, who were selected in the process of selection conducted in furtherance of the notification dated 22.1.1991, by the recruitment board, but had not been appointed on account of the fact, that they did not fall within the number of vacancies advertised. it is however relevant to notice, that after the issuance of the letter dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991, whereby provisionally selected candidates were deputed for training to fill up the advertised vacancies for the posts of sub-inspector of police in all the 7 zones, it came to be realized, that all the provisionally selected candidates did not join the police training college(s) for the said training. so far as zone v (warangal range) is concerned, only 58 candidates joined training. at that very moment, it was open to the appointing authority to depute further candidates for training, out of those whose names fell immediately below the names of candidates deputed for training vide letter dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991, against the balance vacancies. the competent authority, however, delayed in deputing the names of these candidates. it eventually deputed these candidates for training on 14.6.1992. from the factual position depicted hereinabove, it is not possible for us to accept, that the candidates, who were deputed for training on 15.7.1991, and those deputed for training on 14.6.1992 to fulfill the deficiency, can be described as two different batches. the selection process having been joint, and in furtherance of the same notification dated 22.1.1991 (issued by the recruitment board), it is inevitable for us to conclude, that the candidates deputed to the two different courses of training (on 15.7.1991 and 14.6.1992) were essentially candidates belonging to a singular batch, who were selected through a common process of selection. in fact, the instant inference, insofar as the issue of inter se seniority is concerned, is inevitable, as the dates on which the candidates were deputed for training, are inconsequential, so far as rule 15 is concerned. rule 15 leaves no room for any doubt, that even the merit position in the selection process is not to be taken into consideration, while determining the inter se seniority of candidates selected from a common process of selection. if we were to accept the contention advanced on behalf of the appellants, that those deputed in the first batch should be placed above all those deputed in the second batch, we would necessarily be placing the selected candidates in two groups, based on their merit position in the selection process. those deputed for training in the two batches (of 15.7.1991 and 14.6.1992), came to be so deputed, only because of their respective merit position in the selection process. this determination would be in clear breach of the proviso to rule 15, which postulates, that inter se seniority of sub-inspectors of police, is not to be determined in accordance with the merit list drawn up "at the time of their selection". the seniority of candidates, who are selected from a common process of selection, is to be determined on the basis of the final aggregate marks obtained by them, during the course of their training, at the police training college(s) in the state of andhra pradesh. that being the mandate of the rule, we are of the considered view, that for candidates who had participated in a common process of selection, irrespective of the dates on which they were deputed for training, their inter se seniority is liable to be determined, on the basis of the aggregate of marks obtained by them, at the final examination at the concerned police training college. this interpretation placed by us on rule 15 of the service rules, satisfies the underlying principle given effect to in the rule, namely, that the candidates appointed against the posts of sub-inspector of police, were to be arranged in the seniority list, not on the basis of the marks obtained in the process of selection, but according to the aggregate marks obtained by them, at the culmination of the training processes. additionally, the instant interpretation would result in a uniform determination of the three separate considerations dealt with by us. it would be absurd to apply one principle to munuswamy, another principle to those selected and appointed in furtherance of the directions issued by the administrative tribunal on 30.7.1991 (in original application no. 29957 of 1991), and a separate principle for determining seniority of candidates who were deputed for training later, because some of the selected (and appointed) candidates did not join training. this process of deputing candidates for training, could have been adopted within a few days, of the candidates not assuming training, at the police training college(s) despite being required to do so. the concerned authorities delayed the matter, for about a year. neither is it possible for us to find fault with the concerned individuals deputed for training belatedly, nor is it possible for us to interpret a simple and straightforward rule of seniority differently, just because, candidates were deputed to the training course belatedly.17. the view expressed by us upholds the order passed by the state government, and also affirms, the legal position expressed by the administrative tribunal in its common order dated 24.9.2004, as well as, in the impugned order dated 8.2.2005 passed by the high court.18. insofar as the conclusions in the "consideration, three" recorded hereinabove are concerned, it would be relevant to mention here, that the learned counsel for the appellants, namely, the candidates who were deputed for training on 15.7.1991, had also vehemently contended, that the first proviso to rule 15(a) would not be applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case, because the first proviso contemplates a joint training process, where those selected and appointed as sub-inspector of police, are graded on the basis of their performance during a joint/common training process at the police training college. it was submitted, that it would be unfair and unreasonable to determine inter se seniority of candidates, on the basis of two different training processes, the first which had commenced on 15.7.1991, and the second which had commenced on 14.6.1992.19. the submission noticed in the foregoing paragraph, seems to be attractive on first blush. learned counsel for the respondent-state however pointed out, that those selected provisionally (vide letter dated 11.4.1991/7.5.1991), and who were deputed for training on 15.7.1991, had been sent to undergo training, to two different police training colleges, in the state of andhra pradesh. if the submission advanced at the hands of the learned counsel for the appellants was to be accepted, according to learned counsel for the state government, even the seniority position of the 58 candidates, who had joined training on 15.7.1991, having been selected in zone-v (warangal range), could not be validly determined, for the simple reason, that they had undertaken training at two different police training colleges. according to learned state counsel, candidates who were deputed for training subsequently, on 14.6.1992, were also deputed to the same two police training colleges, in the state of andhra pradesh, the curricula for the police training colleges, and the standard prescribed being the same, just as the manner in which the candidates deputed for training to the two different police training colleges, could be compared with one another on the basis of the aggregate marks obtained by them, for fixing their position in the seniority list, so also, those deputed for training on different dates (on 15.7.1991 and 14.6.1992) could likewise be compared with one another on the basis of the aggregate marks obtained by them, in the final examination of their police training. we find merit in the submissions advanced by the learned counsel representing the state of andhra pradesh. for the above reason, it is not possible for us, to accept the above noticed contention, advanced at the hands of the learned counsel for the appellants.20. during the course of hearing, some judgments were cited at the bar, to support the cause of the appellants, and that of the private respondents. the judgments cited pertain to the particular rule of seniority, which was subject matter of consideration. none of the seniority rules which were taken into consideration is akin to rule 15 which is to be applied for determining the inter se seniority of sub-inspectors of police, in the present case. since the validity of rule 15 aforementioned, is not a subject matter of challenge, we have ventured to interpret the same, in consonance with the mandate and intent thereof. we would not like to burden this judgment, with the judgments cited at the bar, by the rival parties.21. for the reasons recorded hereinabove, we find no merit in the instant civil appeals. the same are accordingly dismissed.22. hon'ble mr. justice jagdish singh khehar pronounced the judgment of the bench comprising his lordship and hon'ble mr. justice s.a. bobde.23. for the reasons recorded in the reportable judgment, which is placed on the file, the appeals are dismissed.
s.j. mukhopadhaya, j.1. as the question of law involved is common in both the appeals, they are heard together and disposed of by this common judgment.criminal appeal no. 73 of 20072. brief facts of the case are as follows:the accusedappellant, a.c. narayanan challenged the common order dated 29th november, 2000 passed by the additional chief metropolitan magistrate, 9th court, bandra, mumbai (hereinafter referred to as the, trial court) by filing applications under section 482 of the code of criminal procedure, 1973 before the high court. by the said common order the applications preferred by the appellant-a.c. narayanan for discharge/recalling process against him was rejected by the trial court. the high court by impugned judgment dated 12th august, 2005, dismissed the applications preferred by the appellant and upheld the order passed by the trial court.3. the appellant is the vice-chairman and managing director of the company m/s. harvest financials ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the "company") having its registered office at bombay. under a scheme of investment, the appellant collected various amounts from various persons in the form of loans and in consideration thereof issued post-dated cheques either in his personal capacity or as the signatory of the company which got dishonoured.4. respondent no. 2-mrs. doreen shaikh is the power of attorney holder of six complainants, namely mr. yunus a. cementwalla, smt. fay pinto, mr. mary knoll drego, smt. evelyn drego, mr. shaikh anwar karim bux and smt. gwen piedade. on 16th december, 1997, respondent no. 2 on behalf of the six complainants filed complaint case nos. 292/s/1998, 293/s/1998, 297/s/1998, 298/s/1998, 299/s/1998 and 300/s/1998 respectively against the appellant herein under sections 138 and 142 of the negotiable instruments act, 1881 (hereinafter referred to as the, n.i. act) before the trial court. the said respondent no. 2 verified the complaint in each of those cases as power of attorney holder of the complainants. the additional chief metropolitan magistrate vide order dated 04th april, 1998 issued process against the appellant under section 204 of the code of criminal procedure for the offences punishable under sections 138 and 142 of the n.i. act.5. the appellant, being aggrieved moved an application for discharge/recall of process in each of the complaints. the trial court vide common order dated 29th november, 2000 dismissed the applications filed by the appellant.6. the appellant being aggrieved preferred applications being criminal application nos. 797, 798, 799, 801, 802 and 803 of 2002 before the high court for calling for the records of the case pending in the trial court. by impugned order dated 12th august, 2005 the said applications were dismissed by the high court.criminal appeal no. 1437 of 20137. the brief facts of the case is as follows:this appeal has been preferred by the accused-g. kamalakar against the judgment and order dated 19th september, 2007 passed by the high court of judicature, andhra pradesh of hyderabad in criminal appeal no. 578 of 2002. by the impugned judgment, the high court allowed the appeal preferred by the 1st respondent- m/s. surana securities ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the company) set aside the judgment of acquittal dated 30th october, 2001 passed by the xviii metropolitan magistrate, hyderabad in cc no. 18 of 2000 convicted the appellant under section 138 of the n.i. act and sentenced the appellant to pay a fine of rs. 6,10,000/-, out of which an amount of rs. 6,00,000/- was to be paid to the complainant towards compensation and in default to suffer simple imprisonment for a period of one month.8. the 1st respondent- m/s. surana securities ltd. is the complainant and is a limited company carrying on business of trading in shares. the appellant-g. kamalakar is the client of the 1st respondent-company and used to trade in shares. during the course of business, the appellant-g. kamalakar became liable to pay an amount of rs. 7,21,174/- towards the respondent-company. in order to discharge the said liability, the appellant issued six cheques amounting to rs. 1,00,000/- each and another cheque for rs. 1,21,174/- of different dates. when first six cheques were presented for encashment on 18th september, 1997, the same got dishonoured with an endorsement "funds insufficient". upon receiving such information, the company issued a legal notice to the appellant to pay the amount but the same was not paid by the appellant.9. the board of directors of the 1st respondent-company, by a resolution authorized its managing director to appoint an agent to represent the company. pursuant thereto, one shri v. shankar prasad was appointed as an agent by executing a general power of attorney. later, he was substituted by one shri ravinder singh under another general power of attorney. the respondent-company filed a complaint under section 138 of the n.i. act being cc no. 1098 of 1997 in the court of xith metropolitan magistrate, secunderabad. the complaint was transferred to the court of xviiith metropolitan magistrate, hyderabad by order dated 3rd may, 2000 and was registered as cc no. 18 of 2000. by judgment dated 30th october, 2001, the metropolitan magistrate dismissed the complaint filed by the respondent-company under section 138 of the n.i. act.10. aggrieved by the said order, respondent-company filed an appeal being criminal no. 578 of 2002 before the high court of judicature, andhra pradesh at hyderabad. by the impugned judgment dated 19th september, 2007, the high court allowed the appeal, set aside the judgment dated 30th october, 2001 passed by the xviiith metropolitan magistrate, hyderabad and convicted the appellant under section 138 of the n.i. act. against the aforesaid order of conviction, the present appeal has been preferred.11. on 4th january, 2007, in view of the difference of opinion among various high courts as also decisions of this court in m.m.t.c. ltd. and anr. v. medchl chemicals and pharma (p) ltd. and anr. manu/sc/0728/2001manu/sc/0728/2001 : (2002) 1 scc 234 and janki vashdeo bhojwani and anr. v. indusind bank ltd. and ors. manu/sc/1030/2004manu/sc/1030/2004 : (2005) 2 scc 217 referred the matter to larger bench. the entire order of reference reads as under:delay in filing counter affidavit is condoned.leave granted.interpretation and/or application of section 142(a) of the negotiable instruments act, 1881, ("ni act") is in question in this appeal which arises out of a judgment and order dated 12.8.2005 passed by a learned single judge of the high court of judicature at bombay.the basis fact of the matter is not in dispute.several cheques on different dates were issued by the applicant herein which were dishonoured. the complaint petitions in the court of additional chief metropolitan magistrate, bandra, mumbai. the complaint petitions were filed in the name of the respective payees of the cheques. she also filed affidavits in support of the averments made in the said complaint petitions. cognizance of offence under section 138 of the n.i. act was taken against the appellant. summons were issued. questioning the order issuing summons by the learned magistrate in exercise of his power under section 204 of the code of criminal procedure, appellant herein filed criminal application before the high court of judicature at bombay, inter alia, contending that the complaint petitions filed by the power of attorney holder was not maintainable and relying thereupon or on the basis thereof the learned magistrate could not have issued summons. the said contention has been negative by the high court in its impugned judgment.in the aforementioned premises interpretation of section 142(a) of the n.i. act comes up for consideration before us. we may notice that in m.m.t.c. and anr. v. medchl chemicals & pharma (p) ltd. and anr. manu/sc/0728/2001manu/sc/0728/2001 : (2002) 1 scc 234, a division bench of this court has opined.:this court has, as far back as, in the case of vishwa mitter v. o.p. poddar manu/sc/0378/1983manu/sc/0378/1983 : (1983) 4 scc 701 held that it is clear that anyone can set the criminal law in motion by filing a complaint of facts constituting an offence before a magistrate entitled to take cognizance on the sole ground that the complainant was not competent to file the complaint. it has been held that if any special statute prescribes offences and makes any special provision for taking cognizance of such offences under the statute, then the complainant requesting the magistrate to take cognizance of the office must satisfy the eligibility criterion prescribed by the statute. in the present case, the only eligibility criteria prescribed by section 142 is that the complaint must be by the payee or the holder in due course. this criteria is satisfied as the complaint is in the name and on behalf of the appellant companyhowever, in a later judgment in janki vashdeo bhojwani and anr. v. indusind bank ltd. and ors. manu/sc/1030/2004manu/sc/1030/2004 : 2005 (2) scc 217, albeit in a different context, another division bench of this court overruled the judgment of the bombay high court in pradeep mohanbay v. minguel carlos dias manu/mh/0485/1999manu/mh/0485/1999 : 2000 (1) bom. l.r. 908), inter alia opining as follows:order 3 rules 1 and 2 code of civil procedure empowers the holder of power of attorney to act on behalf of the principal. in our view the word acts employed in order 3 rules 1 and 2 code of civil procedure confines only to in respect of acts done by the power-of-attorney holder in exercise of power granted by the instrument. the term acts would not include deposing in place and instead of the principal. in other words, if the power of attorney holder has rendered some acts in pursuance of power of attorney, he may depose for the principal in respect of such acts, but he cannot depose for the principal for the acts done by the principal and not by him. similarly, he cannot depose for the principal in respect of the matter of which only the principal is entitled to be cross-examined.on the question of power of attorney, the high courts have divergent views. in the case of shambhu dutt shastri v. state of rajasthan [manu/rh/0397/1985manu/rh/0397/1985 : 1986 2 wln 713 (raj.)] it was held that a general power-of-attorney holder can appear, plead and act on behalf of the party but he cannot become a witness on behalf of the party. he can only appear in his own witness box on behalf of himself. to appear in a witness box is altogether a different act. a general power-of-attorney holder cannot be allowed to appear as a witness on behalf of the plaintiff in the capacity of the plaintiff.however, in the case of humberto luis v. gloriano armado luis [(2002) 2 bom. cr 754) on which reliance has been placed by the tribunal in the present case, the high court took a dissenting view and held that the provisions contained in order 3 rule 2 code of civil procedure cannot be construed to disentitle the power-of-attorney holder to depose on behalf of his principal. the high court further held that the word act appearing in order 3 rule 2 code of civil procedure takes within its sweep depose. we are unable to agree with this view taken by the bombay high court in floriano armando.it is not in dispute that there is a conflict of opinion on this issue amongst various high courts, including the decision of bombay high court in mamtadevi prafullakumar bhansali v. pushpadevi kailashkumar agrawal and anr. [manu/mh/0266/2005manu/mh/0266/2005 : 2005 (2) mah. l.j. 1003) on the one hand and a decision of the andhra pradesh high court in s.p. sampathy v. manju gupta and anr. manu/ap/0716/2002manu/ap/0716/2002 : (2002) crl.l.j. 2621), on the other. one of the questions which would arise for consideration is as to whether the eligibility criteria prescribed by section 142(a) of the ni act would stand satisfied if the complaint petition itself is filed in the name of the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque and/or whether a complaint petition has to be presented before the court by the payee or the holder of the cheque himself.another issue which would arise for consideration is as to whether the payee must examine himself in support of the complaint petition keeping in view the insertion of section 145 of the said act (act no. 55 of 2002).in our opinion, in view of difference of opinion amongst various high courts as also the decisions of this court in m.m.t.c. ltd. (supra) and janki vashdeo bhojwani (supra), particularly in view of the fact that in the later case the earlier one was not noticed, an authoritative pronouncement is necessary to be given in this regard. we, therefore, are of the opinion that the matter should be considered by a larger bench.12. the matter was considered by a larger bench of three judges. by judgment dated 13th september, 2013 reported in manu/sc/0934/2013manu/sc/0934/2013 : 2013 (11) scale 360 - a.c. narayanan v. state of maharashtra the said larger bench framed the following questions:(i) whether a power of attorney holder can sign and file a complaint petition behalf of the complainant? whether the eligibility criteria prescribed by section 142(a) of ni act would stand satisfied if the complaint petition itself is filed in the name of the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque?(ii) whether a power of attorney holder can be varied on oath under section 200 of the code?(iii) whether specific averments as to the knowledge of the power of attorney holder in the impugned transaction must be explicitly asserted in the complaint?(iv) if the power of attorney holder fails to assert explicitly his knowledge in the complaint then can the power of attorney holder verify the complaint on oath on such presumption of knowledge?(v) whether the proceedings contemplated under section 200 of the code can be dispensed with in the light of section 145 of the n.i. act which was introduced by an amendment in the year 2002?13. the first question relating to the eligibility of power of attorney holder to sign and file a complaint petition on behalf of the complainants and whether eligibility criteria prescribed by section 142(a) of n.i. act is satisfied, if the complaint petition itself is filed in the name of the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, was answered by larger bench in affirmative by its judgment in a.c. narayanan v. state of maharashtra manu/sc/0934/2013manu/sc/0934/2013 : 2013 (11) scale 360 with observation, which reads as follows:19) as noticed hereinabove, though janki vashdeo bhojwani (supra), relates to powers of power of attorney holder under code of civil procedure but it was concluded therein that a plaint by a power of attorney holder on behalf of the original plaintiff is maintainable provided he has personal knowledge of the transaction in question. in a way, it is an exception to a well settled position that criminal law can be put in motion by anyone [vide vishwa mitter (supra)] and under the statute, one stranger to transaction in question, namely, legal heir etc., can also carry forward the pending criminal complaint or initiate the criminal action if the original complainant dies [vide ashwin nanubhai vyas v. state of maharashtra manu/sc/0101/1966manu/sc/0101/1966 : (1967) 1 scr 807]. keeping in mind various situations like inability as a result of sickness, old age or death or staying abroad of the payee or holder in due course to appear and depose before the court in order to prove the complaint, it is permissible for the power of attorney holder or for the legal representative(s) to file a complaint and/or continue with the 21 page 22 pending criminal complaint for and on behalf of payee or holder in due course. however, it is expected that such power of attorney holder or legal representative(s) should have knowledge about the transaction in question so as to able to bring on record the truth of the grievance/offence, otherwise, no criminal justice could be achieved in case payee or holder in due course, is unable to sign, appear or depose as complainant due to above quoted reasons. keeping these aspects in mind, in mmtc (supra), this court had taken the view that if complaint is filed for and on behalf of payee or holder in due course, that is good enough compliance with section 142 of n.i. act.14. the second question relating to verification of power of attorney holder on oath as prescribed under section 200 of the code was answered as follows:20) the stand of the appellant in criminal appeal no. 73 of 2007 is that no complaint can be filed and no cognizance of the complaint can be taken if the complaint is by the power of attorney holder, since it is against section 200 of the code and deserves to be rejected. there is no dispute that complaint has to be filed by the complainant as contemplated by section 200 of the code, but the said section does not create any embargo that the attorney holder or legal representative(s) cannot be a complainant.22) from a conjoint reading of sections 138, 142 and 145 of the n.i. act as well as section 200 of the code, it is clear that it is open to the magistrate to issue process on the basis of the contents of the complaint, documents in support thereof and the affidavit submitted by the complainant in support of the complaint. once the complainant files an affidavit in support of the complaint before issuance of the process under section 200 of the code, it is thereafter open to the magistrate, if he thinks fit, to call upon the complainant to remain present and to examine him as to the facts contained in the affidavit submitted by the complainant in support of his complaint. however, it is a matter of discretion and the magistrate is not bound to call upon the complainant to remain present before the court and to examine him upon oath for taking decision whether or not to issue process on the complaint under section 138 of the n.i. act. for the purpose of issuing process under section 200 of the code, it is open to the magistrate to rely upon the verification in the form of affidavit filed by the complainant in support of the complaint under section 138 of the n.i. act. it is only if and where the magistrate, after considering the complaint under section 138 of the n.i. act, documents produced in support thereof and the verification in the form of affidavit of the complainant, is of the view that examination of the complainant or his witness(s) is required, the magistrate may call upon the complainant to remain present before the court and examine the complainant and/or his witness upon oath for taking a decision whether or not to issue process on the complaint under section 138 of the n.i. act.23) in the light of the discussion, we are of the view that the power of attorney holder may be allowed to file, appear and depose for the purpose of issue of process for the offence punishable under section 138 of the n.i. act. an exception to the above is when the power of attorney holder of the complainant does not have a personal knowledge about the transactions then he cannot be examined. however, where the attorney holder of the complainant is in charge of the business of the complainant payee and the attorney holder alone is personally aware of the transactions, there is no reason why the attorney holder cannot depose as a witness. nevertheless, an explicit assertion as to the knowledge of the power of attorney holder about the transaction in question must be specified in the complaint. on this count, the fourth question becomes infructuous.24) in view of the discussion, we are of the opinion that the attorney holder cannot file a complaint in his own name as if he was the complainant, but he can initiate criminal proceedings on behalf of his principal. we also reiterate that where the payee is a proprietary concern, the complaint can be filed (i) by the proprietor of the proprietary concern, describing himself as the sole proprietor of the "payee"; (ii) the proprietary concern, describing itself as a sole proprietary concern, represented by its sole proprietor; and (iii) the proprietor or the proprietary concern represented by the attorney holder under a power of attorney executed by the sole proprietor.25) similar substantial questions were raised in the appeal arising out of s.l.p. (crl.) no. 2724 of 2008, which stand answered as above. apart from the above questions, one distinct query was raised as to whether a person authorized by a company or statute or institution can delegate powers to their subordinate/others for filing a criminal complaint? the issue raised is in reference to validity of sub-delegation of functions of the power of attorney. we have already clarified to the extent that the attorney holder can sign and file a complaint on behalf of the complainant-payee. however, whether the power of attorney holder will have the power to further delegate the functions to another person will completely depend on the terms of the general power of attorney. as a result, the authority to sub-delegate the functions must be explicitly mentioned in the general power of attorney. otherwise, the sub-delegation will be inconsistent with the general power of attorney and thereby will be invalid in law. nevertheless, the general power of attorney itself can be cancelled and be given to another person.15. while holding that there is no serious conflict between the decisions in "mmtc (supra) and janki vashdeo bhojwani (supra)", the larger bench clarified the position and answered the questions framed in the following manner:(i) filing of complaint petition under section 138 of n.i. act through power of attorney is perfectly legal and competent.(ii) the power of attorney holder can depose and verify on oath before the court in order to prove the contents of the complaint. however, the power of attorney holder must have witnessed the transaction as an agent of the payee/holder in due course or possess due knowledge regarding the said transactions.(iii) it is required by the complainant to make specific assertion as to the knowledge of the power of attorney holder in the said transaction explicitly in the complaint and the power of attorney holder who has no knowledge regarding the transactions cannot be examined as a witness in the case.(iv) in the light of section 145 of n.i. act, it is open to the magistrate to rely upon the verification in the form of affidavit filed by the complainant in support of the complaint under section 138 of the n.i. act and the magistrate is neither mandatorily obliged to call upon the complainant to remain present before the court, nor to examine the complainant of his witness upon oath for taking the decision whether or not to issue process on the complaint under section 138 of the n.i. act.(v) the functions under the general power of attorney cannot be delegated to another person without specific clause permitting the same in the power of attorney. nevertheless, the general power of attorney itself can be cancelled and be given to another person.case of a.c. narayanan16. in this case magistrate had taken cognizance of the complaint without prima facie establishing the fact as to whether the power of attorney existed in first place and whether it was in order. it is not in dispute that the complaint against the appellant was not preferred by the payee or the holder in due course and the statement on oath of the person who filed the complaint has also not stated that he filed the complaint having been instructed by the payee or holder in due course of the cheque. since the complaint was not filed abiding with the provisions of the act, it was not open to the magistrate to take cognizance.17. from the bare perusal of the said complaint, it can be seen that except mentioning in the cause title there is no mention of, or a reference to the power of attorney in the body of the said complaint nor was it exhibited as part of the said complaint. further, in the list of evidence there is just a mere mention of the words at serial no. 6 viz. "power of attorney", however there is no date or any other particulars of the power of attorney mentioned in the complaint. even in the verification statement made by the respondent no. 2, there is not even a whisper that she is filing the complaint as the power of attorney holder of the complainant. even the order of issue of process dated 20th february, 1998 does not mention that the magistrate had perused any power of attorney for issuing process.18. the appellant has stated that his advocate conducted search and inspection of the papers and proceedings of the criminal complaint and found that no power of attorney was found to be a part of that record. this has not been disputed by the respondents. in that view of the matter and in light of decision of the larger bench, as referred above, we hold that the magistrate wrongly took cognizance in the matter and the court below erred in putting the onus on the appellant rather than the complainant. the aforesaid fact has also been overlooked by the high court while passing the impugned judgment dated 12th august, 2005.19. in the result, the impugned judgment dated 12th august, 2005 passed by the high court of judicature at bombay and the order dated 29th november, 2000 passed by the additional chief metropolitan magistrate, 9th court, bandra, mumbai are set aside and the proceedings in question against the appellant are quashed.case of g. kamalakar20. in this case it is not in dispute that the complaint was filed by one shri v. shankar prasad claiming to be general power of attorney of the complainant company. subsequently pw-1 shri ravinder singh gave the evidence on behalf of the company under the general power of attorney given by the complainant company. the complaint was not signed either by managing director or director of the company. it is also not in dispute that pw-1 is only the employee of the company. as per resolution of the company i.e. ex. p3 under first part managing director and director are authorized to file suits and criminal complaints against the debtors for recovery of money and for prosecution. under third part of the said resolution they were authorized to appoint or nominate any other person to appear on their behalf in the court and engage lawyer etc. but nothing on the record suggest that an employee is empowered to file the complaint on behalf of the company. this apart, managing director and director are authorized persons of the company to file the complaint by signing and by giving evidence. at best the said persons can nominate any person to represent themselves or the company before the court. in the present case one shri shankar prasad employee of the company signed the complaint and the deputy general manager of the company i.e. pw-1 gave evidence as if he knows everything though he does not know anything. there is nothing on the record to suggest that he was authorized by the managing director or any director. therefore, magistrate by judgment dated 30th october, 2001 rightly acquitted the appellant. in such a situation, the case of the appellant is fully covered by decision by the larger bench of this court passed in the present appeal. we have no other option but to set aside the impugned judgment dated 19th september, 2007 passed by the high court of judicature, andhra pradesh at hyderabad in criminal appeal no. 578 of 2002. the judgment and order dated 30th october, 2001 passed by the court of xviii metropolitan magistrate, hyderabad in c.c. no. 18 of 2000 is upheld.21. the appeals are allowed accordingly.
kurian joseph, j.1. delay condoned.2. leave granted.3. in the nature of the order we propose to pass in this appeal, it is not necessary to go into the factual aspects of the case.4. the appellant approached this court aggrieved by the common judgment dated 10th april, 2013 and modified order dated 14th june, 2013 passed by the high court of judicature of bombay, bench at aurangabad. the learned counsel for the appellant submits that this case is covered by the judgment dated 11th september, 2015 of this court passed in c.a. nos. 7137-7160 of 2015 titled fula bhoru ughade, etc. etc. v. executive engineer, public works department, ahmednagar wherein one time compensation has been enhanced from rs. 40,000/- (rupees forty thousand only) to rs. 1,00,000/- (rupees one lakh only) and all others, similarly situated, have been paid the said amount.5. in view of the above, it would be appropriate for the appellant to make a representation before the respondent within a period of one month. if such a representation is filed, the respondent shall consider the same in the light of the judgment referred to supra, and take the required action.6. in case appellant is covered by the said judgment, the appellant shall also be given the same amount of rs. 1,00,000 (rupees one lakh only) and it shall be done within a period of one month thereafter.7. the appeal is disposed of accordingly.
r.k. agrawal, j.civil appeal nos. 3518-35201. these appeals are directed against the common final judgment and order dated 23.05.2006 passed by the division bench of the high court of kerala at ernakulam in writ appeal nos. 2011, 2012 and 2235 of 2005 whereby the high court dismissed the appeals filed by the appellants herein against the judgment and order dated 27.07.2005 passed by learned single judge of the high court in writ petition (c) nos. 14495, 16063 and 19582 of 2005.2. brief facts:(a) the state of kerala, by notification dated 13.01.2005, issued in exercise of the power conferred by section 5 of the lotteries (regulation) act, 1998, (in short 'the act'), prohibited the sale of all computerized and online lottery tickets marketed and operated through vending machines, terminals, electronic machines and tickets sold through internet in the state with immediate effect and declared that kerala shall be a free zone from online and internet lotteries.(b) by a subsequent notification dated 27.01.2005, the state of kerala decided to prohibit the sale of all lotteries organized, conducted or promoted by the state as well as by every other state government in the state of kerala with immediate effect and declared that the state shall hereafter be a lottery free zone.(c) the state of kerala, in partial modification of the notification dated 27.01.2005, issued a subsequent notification dated 22.04.2005, permitting the sale of paper lotteries organized, conducted or promoted by every state government including the state of kerala and the prohibition imposed on the sale of computerized and on-line lottery tickets organized, conducted or promoted by every state government continued to remain in force declaring the territory of the state of kerala to be online, internet and computerized lotteries free zone.(d) being aggrieved by the notification dated 22.04.2005 discriminating between the paper lotteries and online lotteries, the all kerala online lottery dealers association, state of sikkim and one sreekala and others filed writ petition (c) nos. 19582, 14495 and 16063 of 2005 respectively before the high court.(e) a learned single judge of the high court, by judgment and order dated 27.07.2005, dismissed the writ petitions.(f) being aggrieved by the decision of the learned single judge, the petitioners therein preferred writ appeal nos. 2011, 2012 and 2235 of 2005 before the division bench of the high court.(g) the division bench, by a common judgment and order dated 23.05.2006, dismissed the appeals.(h) against the said order, the appellants have preferred these appeals by way of special leave before this court.writ petition (c) nos. 641 of 2007 and 233 of 2010(a) one bibhash karmakar-the petitioner herein has filed the above petitions in public interest alleging that the states of sikkim, nagaland and goa are running lottery business contrary to the provisions of the act which is detrimental to the society as a whole.(b) this court, by order dated 27.11.2009 in writ petition (c) no. 641 of 2007, directed the state to explain as to whether the state of sikkim is running lottery business contrary to the provisions of section 4 of the act. in response to the above, the state government filed an affidavit dated 10.12.2009 before this court denying all the irregularities as claimed by the petitioner herein and cited various provisions of the act as well as the sikkim online network lottery rules, 2001 to show that the lottery business in the state is in consonance with the pre-existing rules and regulations.(c) this court, by order dated 21.06.2010, tagged writ petition (c) no. 233 of 2010 with writ petition (c) no. 641 of 2007.3. heard the arguments advanced by learned senior counsel for the parties and perused the records. since a common question of law and facts arise in these appeals and petitions, they are being disposed of by this common judgment.points for consideration:4. the sole question for consideration before this court is whether the state government can discriminate between the paper lottery and online lottery in pursuance of the provision of section 5 of the act.rival submissions:5. learned senior counsel for the appellants contended before this court that online lottery is also a lottery, as defined under section 2(b) of the act. so, if the state government intends to prohibit the same, it has to prohibit all the lotteries whether paper or online. the selective prohibition of the sale of online lottery tickets is impermissible, in the light of section 5 of the act, as interpreted by this court in b.r. enterprises v. state of u.p. and ors. manu/sc/0330/1999manu/sc/0330/1999 : (1999) 9 scc 700. the distinction drawn by the state government between paper lottery and online lottery is discriminatory and violative of article 14 of the constitution of india. learned senior counsel further contended that the impugned notification is vitiated by mala fides. it was further alleged that the state government is being controlled by the paper lottery mafia and under its influence the sale of online lottery tickets has been prohibited. the state government does not have the competence to issue the impugned notification. though the state government is competent to legislate on lotteries by virtue of item 34 of list ii concerning betting and gambling, the power to legislate on lotteries organized by the government of india or the government of a state is the exclusive preserve of the parliament by virtue of entry 40 of list i of the seventh schedule. so, the state government, which is incompetent to legislate on lotteries run by other states, has no power to issue the impugned notification. the state government, without legislative competence, has ventured to prohibit online lottery which is totally fraudulent and colourable exercise of the power.6. learned senior counsel for the appellants further pointed out that the contention that online lottery was not in the contemplation of the parliament or the court, cannot be accepted. the act has to be interpreted to adapt it to the changing times. according to learned senior counsel, the parliament was well aware about the growing advancement of science and technology and the use of electronic media in future days to come and, therefore, when it defined 'lottery' under section 2(b) of the act, it included also the online lottery or internet lottery which may come into existence in future. it was further submitted that the provision contained in section 5 of the act would empower the state government to prohibit the sale of tickets of all the lotteries and it cannot be restricted only to online or internet lotteries. he further submitted that if it is to be taken that the online lottery is a class of lotteries for which the state government is empowered to prohibit then it is only the parliament which can classify the same and the state of kerala has no power to do so. according to him, the central government framed the lotteries (regulation) rules, 2010 (in short 'the rules') under sub-section (1) of section 11 of the act and defined online lotteries under rule 2(e) of the rules that too for the first time in the year 2010, therefore, the state government had no right or jurisdiction to prohibit the online lottery in the year 2005. the principles laid down in b.r. enterprises (supra) will apply to all types of lotteries and a judgment of this court cannot be ignored merely by saying that it failed to consider some point or other.7. learned senior counsel further contended that this court, in b.r. enterprises (supra), has read down section 5 of the act, to save it from the vice of unconstitutionality, emanating from conferring unbridled power on the state, which may be termed as abdication of the essential legislative function, by failing to provide guidelines for the exercise of that power. in the said decision, in paragraphs 84 and 87, it was held as follows:84. in section 2(b) lotteries are defined to be a scheme for distribution of prizes by a lot or chance. this definition itself recognizes that even in state lotteries the prizes are to be collected by chance without any skill, hence gambling in nature. section 3 prohibits that no state lotteries can be organized without the condition stipulated under clauses (a) to (k) of section 4. section 4 provides the conditions to be complied with by the state lotteries. to initiate any state lottery it is left to the policy of each state, for this act is silent. the only control is, in case it decides, then it must follow the conditions as laid down under section 4. next comes section 5 which is subject matter of challenge, the delegation of power to the state to prohibit the sale of lottery tickets organized by every other state. if a state desires not to subject its people to the lottery gambling, it has no power to restrict lotteries organized by other states. it is to remove this mischief that power is conferred through delegation to the states to do it in terms of their own policy. by virtue of this, now the state government can prohibit sale of lottery tickets of every other state within its territory. next, section 6 seeks strict compliance with section 4. under this the central government may prohibit any state lottery which is being conducted in contravention of the conditions as laid down under section 4 or section 5. section 7 shows the rigour of this act by making it a penal offence as against all, who violate the provisions of this act, be it is head of the department of the government or the agent, promoter or trader to be punishable with two years rigorous imprisonment. section 8 makes such an offence cognizable and non-bailable. similarly, section 9 deals with offences committed by the companies. section 10 entrusts the central government power to give directions to the state government for carrying into execution the provisions of this act, rule or order. sections 11 and 12 are the rule-making power entrusted to the central and the state governments respectively. section 13 repeals the ordinance. thus, the whole act makes clear that the subject it is dealing with is gambling in nature. the object of the act is not to control the policy decision of each state to start or to close its lotteries, but to regulate it in case a state decides to run its own lottery through modalities and conditions laid down therein. emphasis of the whole act is to abide by the conditions strictly if you want to run a lottery. thus, regulation is through conditions to eliminate even the remotest possibility of malpractices by providing stringent measures for its compliance. perusal of the act reveals, the scheme of the act is limited in its application, and it admits the subject it is dealing is gambling in nature. as we have said, the decision to collect or not to collect revenue through state lotteries is exclusively within the policy decision of the state and for this, neither the union nor parliament interferes nor is there any indication under the act. thus, the question which remains is, if any state decides that it does not want any lotteries but if it feels helpless as having no jurisdiction over the lotteries organized by other states, what is the way out ? this can only be done by parliament or by entrusting this power on such state desiring so, which has been done through section 5. in this background, for this helplessness of a state as recorded in anraj case-i [manu/sc/0336/1984manu/sc/0336/1984 : (1984) 2 scc 292] the remedy is provided by entrusting this power on the state under the impugned provision. this helps such state to achieve its objective of lottery (gambling) free zone within its territory. a well-concerned remedy. next question is what could have been the guideline? if state lotteries are gambling and it cannot be terms as 'trade and commerce' at common parlance for any free right under the constitution. such right though recognized under article 298, so other states may continue to enjoy till prohibited by valid law, and if any state wants within its state lottery-free zone and for which the power is entrusted to such state, it cannot be said in this setting and background and the nature of the subject that such a delegation is of its essential legislative power. the only guideline necessary in such delegation is to see that the state does not pick and choose one state from the other, which guideline is already provided in this section. it provides that such a ban could only be if it is applied to every other state. the only residual field of attack so far as this delegation could be, which has been attacked in this case, that the state could on one hand ban lotteries of every other state but run its own lotteries. it is argued that while a state bans lotteries of other states not to permit any gambling activity in the public interest as a policy but this very public interest is flouted by having lotteries of its own. it is true that unless this provision is read down to mean a state can only ban lotteries of other states when it bans as a policy its own lotteries it is bound to be subjected to the vagaries as pointed out and on deeper scrutiny it may not successfully stand. but, by reading down the provision, which has to be read that it is only that state which decides lottery-free zone within its state can prohibit lotteries of other states clearly provides the guidance for the exercise of such a power. it is inbuilt and inherent in the provision itself in view of the scheme of the act and nature of subject in issue. if interpretation as given on behalf of the state of tamil nadu is accepted that delegation of power is absolute, then the submission that such delegation is unbridled without any guideline carries great weight. submission for the state of tamil nadu is that the lotteries may be prohibited in phases, viz. while running its own lotteries yet prohibiting other lotteries, may be as a public policy, for law and order, for political reasons, morality, etc. for surviving such an interpretation given by mr. ganguli, parliament should have provided some guidelines. such an interpretation falls into the trap of the submission that this delegation is unbridled. so, if there are two interpretations, the interpretation which upholds the validity should be accepted. so, the interpretation as given by mr. ganguli cannot be accepted.87. we find on plain reading of section 5, it empowers the state government within its state to prohibit the sale of tickets of the lotteries organized by every other state. there is also nothing in the language reading by itself so as to say, whether such power can be exercised by the state while running its own lottery or can be exercised only where such state does not run its own lottery. this leads to two possible interpretations, as referred to above. in view of settled principle of interpretations, the interpretation given by the union to read down the provision has substance. this would mean that the state could only exercise such discretion if it decides not to have any lottery within its territory including its own lottery. in this situation, the delegate is tied down by this limitation which itself is a clear guide to a state hence cannot be said to be unbridled delegation. so even to the first part it cannot be said to be arbitrary or unbridled. so, we have no hesitation to approve the interpretation given by the union to uphold the validity of section 5.relying on the above quoted paragraphs, learned senior counsel for the appellants vehemently contended that the state shall either prohibit the sale of all lotteries or allow the sale of all lotteries in the state. selective prohibition of a particular type of lottery is impermissible in the light of the above binding judgment.8. in support of this submission learned senior counsel apart from the decision in b.r. enterprises (supra) relied on the following decisions, viz., the senior electric inspector and ors. v. laxmi narayan chopra and ors. manu/sc/0221/1961manu/sc/0221/1961 : 1962 (3) scr 146, state (through cbi/new delhi) v. s.j. choudhary manu/sc/2199/1996manu/sc/2199/1996 : (1996) 2 scc 428 and sil import, usa v. exim aides silk exporters, bangalore manu/sc/0312/1999manu/sc/0312/1999 : (1999) 4 scc 567.9. the learned senior counsel for the state of kerala-the respondent herein supported the impugned notification by contending that the state government is competent to prohibit a particular type of lottery. there is no fetter on the power of the government under section 5. learned senior counsel further submitted that when the parliament enacted the act in the year 1998, there was nothing before it to presume that in times to come online lotteries will also come into existence apart from the paper lotteries and, therefore, the provision of section 5 which empowers the state government to prohibit the sale of tickets of a lottery organized, conducted or promoted by every other state necessarily relate to paper lottery. even otherwise, online lottery is different from paper lottery and can be treated as a class in itself. the state government is, therefore, empowered under section 5 of the act to prohibit the sale of online lotteries or internet lotteries in its state. he further submitted that the central government itself treated online lotteries as a different class in itself and, therefore, framed the rules providing the rules and regulations for organizing paper lottery or online lottery or both subject to certain terms and conditions. thus, the intention of the parliament was to treat paper lotteries and online lotteries a different class. the decision in b.r. enterprises (supra) would therefore necessarily be understood to relate to paper lotteries only. the said decision cannot be construed as a precedent. so, the declaration of law, made therein, is not applicable to online lotteries. it is also submitted that prohibition of sale of online lotteries has been made bona fide and the classification is reasonable and not arbitrary. learned senior counsel further submitted that the scheme of section 4 would show that the act was framed with a view to deal with paper lotteries which were in vogue at that point of time whereas the distributors of online lotteries do much more than selling the tickets. they decide and implement the lottery schemes, provide infra-structure and technology, print lotteries and participate in the conduct of draws. section 4(h) of the act prohibits holding of draws, more than once in a week. this restriction has been made taking into account the conduct of paper lotteries. but, in online lotteries, 70 to 100 draws are made every day in a week. on the above grounds the respondents prayed for dismissal of the appeals.discussion:10. before going into the validity of the impugned notification, it is fruitful to refer to certain provisions of the act. the relevant portion of the statement of objects and reasons for framing this legislation is as under:the conduct of certain types of lottery trade in the country, the malpractices thereof and their impact on the poorer sections of the society has been under scrutiny of the government for quite some time. the continued prevalence of the popularly known single digit and instant lotteries and the temptation offered by them proved to be the undoing of many families, especially poor daily wagers and low income groups.in spite of the guidelines issued by the central government over a period of time as also the guidelines issued in the recent past by the honourable supreme court. in the matter, the evil has not been totally eliminated and it is felt that a central legislation to regulate the conduct of lotteries is necessary to protect the interest of the gullible poor.section 2(b) defines 'lottery' which reads as follows:2(b) 'lottery' means a scheme, in whatever form and by whatever name called, for distribution of prizes by lot or chance to those persons participating in the chances of a prize by purchasing tickets."3. prohibition of lotteries.--save as otherwise provided in section 4, no state government shall organize, conduct or promote any lottery.section 4 enumerates the conditions, subject to which a state government may organize, conduct or promote a lottery, which reads as follows:4. conditions subject to which lotteries may be organized etc.: a state government may organize, conduct or promote a lottery, subject to the following conditions, namely:(a) prizes shall not be offered on any pre-announced number or on the basis of a single digit;(b) the state government shall print the lottery tickets bearing the imprint and logo of the state in such manner that the authenticity of the lottery ticket is ensured;(c) the state government shall sell the tickets either itself or through distributors or selling agents;(d) the proceeds of the sale of lottery tickets shall be credited into the public account of the state;(e) the state government itself shall conduct the draws of all the lotteries;(f) the prize money unclaimed within such time as may be prescribed by the state government or not otherwise distributed, shall become the property of that government;(g) the place of draw shall be located within the state concerned;(h) no lottery shall have more than one draw in week;(i) the draws of all kinds of lotteries shall be conducted between such period of the day as may be prescribed by the state government;(j) the number of bumper draws of a lottery shall not be more than six in a calendar year;(k) such other conditions as may be prescribed by the central government.5. prohibition of sale of ticket in a state.--a state government may, within the state, prohibit the sale of tickets of a lottery organized, conducted or promoted by every other state.6. prohibition of organization etc., of lottery.--the central government may, by order published in the official gazette, prohibit a lottery organized, conducted or promoted in contravention of the provisions of section 4 or where tickets of such lottery are sold in contravention of the provisions of section 5.7. penalty.--(1) where a lottery is organized, conducted or promoted after the date on which this act receives the assent of the president, in contravention of the provisions of this act, by any department of the state government, the head of the department shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine or with both:provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such head of the department liable to any punishment if he proves that the contravention was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such contravention.(2) notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a contravention under this act has been committed by a department of government and it is proved that the contravention has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the head of the department, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.(3) if any person acts as an agent or promoter or trader in any lottery organized, conducted or promoted in contravention of the provisions of this act or sells, distributes or purchases the ticket of such lottery, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine or with both.8. offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.--the offence under this act shall be cognizable and non-bailable.11. from the above provisions, it can be seen that the tickets of a state-run lottery shall be printed by the state itself. sale of tickets alone is permitted through the agents or through distributors. the entire sale proceeds have to be credited in the public account of the state. draws of all the lotteries have to be conducted by the state government. no lottery can have more than one draw in a week. bumper draws shall not be more than six in a calendar year. the cumulative effect of sub-sections (h) and (j) appears to be that a state can run only 52 ordinary lotteries and six bumper lotteries in a year. section 5 empowers the state government to prohibit the sale of tickets of lotteries organized, conducted or promoted by every other state government. section 6 empowers the central government to prohibit the conduct of lotteries, which are in violation of the provisions of section 4 or which are sold in contravention of the prohibition imposed by the state government under section 5. section 7 provides the penalty for running a lottery in violation of the provisions of the act. the head of the department and other officers responsible for the conduct of the lottery shall be punished with imprisonment, which may extend to two years or with fine or with both. similar punishment can be imposed on those who sell or purchase the tickets of such a lottery. section 8 makes the offences under the act cognizable and non-bailable. cognizable offence means an offence for which a police officer may arrest the accused without warrant (section 2(c) of the code of criminal procedure, 1973 (in short 'the code'). in this background, it is also relevant to quote section 4 of the code which reads as follows:4. trial of offences under the indian penal code and other laws: (1) all offences under the indian penal code (45 of 1860) shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with according to the provisions hereinafter contained.(2) all offences under any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offences.since no provision is made for investigating the offences under the act, the provisions under the code will apply to its investigation, by virtue of section 4(2) of the code quoted above.12. it is also relevant to mention the notifications issued by the state government from time to time.government of kerala2005reg. no. kl/tv(n)/12/2003-2005kerala gazetteextraordinarypublished by authorityvol. lvolume 50thiruvananthapuram13th january, 2005 thursdayno. 7723nd pousha 1926government of keralataxes (h) departmentnotificationg.o. (p) no. 4/2005/td dated, thiruvanathapuram, 13th january, 2005.s.r.o. no. 34/2005-in exercise of the powers conferred by section 5 of the lotteries (regulation) act, 1998 (central act 17 of 1998), the government of kerala hereby prohibit the sale of all computerised and online lottery tickets marketed and operated through vending machines, terminals, electronic machines and tickets sold through internet in kerala, with immediate effect and declare that kerala shall be the free zone from online and internetby order of the governor.p. mara pandyan,secretary to governmentexplanatory note(this does not form part of the notification, but is intended to indicate its general purport).government have decided to prohibit the sale of computerized and online lottery tickets in the state of kerala with immediate effectthis notification is intended to achieve the above object."government of kerala2005reg. no. kl/tv(n)/12/2003-2005kerala gazetteextraordinarypublished by authorityvol. lvolume 50thiruvananthapuram27th january, 2005 thursdayno. 1697th magga 1926government of keralataxes (h) departmentnotificationg.o. (p) no. 11/2005/td dated, thiruvanathapuram, 27th january, 2005.s.r.o. no. 73/2005-whereas notification ii g.o. (p) no. 4/2005/td dated 13th january, 2005 published as s.r.o. no. 34/2005 in kerala gazette extraordinary no. 77 dated the 13th january, 2005 prohibiting the sale of computerized and online lottery tickets in the state of kerala has been issued under section 5 of the lotteries regulation act, 1998 (central act 17 of 1998).and whereas the government of kerala have decided to prohibit the sale of all lotteries organized, conducted or promoted by the state of kerala with immediate effect.and whereas the government of kerala have decided to prohibit the sale of tickets of all lotteries organized, conducted or promoted by every other state government also;now therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 5 of the lotteries (regulation) act, 1998 (central act 17 of 1998) and all other powers enabling for it, the government of kerala hereby prohibit the sale of tickets of all lotteries organized, conducted or promoted by every other state government including lotteries organized, conducted or promoted by the government of kerala in the state of kerala with immediate effect and declare that the state of kerala shall hereafter be a lottery free zone.by order of the governor.p. mara pandyan,secretary to governmentexplanatory note(this does not form part of the notification, but is intended to indicate its general purport).government of kerala have decided to make the state of kerala a lottery free zone.this notification is intended to achieve the above object.iig.o. (p) no. 11/2005/td dated, thiruvananthapuram, 27th january, 2005.s.r.o. no. 74/2005,-in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 12 of the lotteries (regulation) act, 1998 (central act 17 of 1998), the government of kerala hereby make the following rules to repeal the kerala state lotteries (regulation) rules, 2003 issued in g.o. (p) no. 118/2003/td dated the 16th july, 2003 and published as s.r.o. no. 646/2003 in the kerala gazette extraordinary no. 1278 dated the 16th july, 2003, as amended subsequently, namely:rules1. short title, application and commencement: (1) these rules may be called the kerala state lotteries (regulation) (repeal) rules, 2005.2. these rules shall apply to the whole of the state of kerala.3. they shall come into force at once.2. repeal: the kerala state lotteries (regulation) rules, 2003 is hereby repealed.by order of the governor.p. mara pandyan,secretary to governmentexplanatory note(this does not form part of the notification, but is intended to indicate its general purport).government of kerala by notification issued as g.o. (p) no. 11/2005/td dated 27th january, 2005 and published as s.r.o. no. 73 in kerala gazette extraordinary no. 169 dated 27th january, 2005 has prohibited the sale of lottery tickets organized, conducted or promoted by the government of kerala. accordingly the kerala state lotteries (regulation) rules, 2003 has to be repealed.this notification is intended to achieve the above object."government of kerala2005reg. no. kl/tv(n)/12/2003-2005kerala gazetteextraordinarypublished by authorityvol. lvolume 50 thiruvananthapuram22nd april, 2005 fridayno. 8372nd vaisakha 1927government of keralataxes (h) departmentnotificationsg.o. (p) no. 382/2005/td dated, thiruvanathapuram, 22nd april, 2005.s.r.o. no. 73/2005-whereas notification ii g.o. (p) no. 4/2005/td dated 13th january, 2005 published as s.r.o. no. 34/2005 in kerala gazette extraordinary no. 77 dated the 13th january, 2005 prohibiting the sale of computerized and online lottery tickets in the state of kerala.and whereas, by notification no. i issued as g.o. (p) no. 11/2005/td dated 27th january, 2005 and published as s.r.o. no. 73 in the kerala gazette extraordinary no. 169 dated the 27th january, 2005, the government of kerala prohibited the sale of tickets of all lotteries organized, conducted or promoted by every state government including that of state of kerala and declared the state as a lottery free zone.now therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 5 of the lotteries (regulation) act, 1998 (central act 17 of 1998) and in partial modification of the notification issued as s.r.o. no. 73/2005 dated the 27th january, 2005, the government of kerala hereby lift the prohibition partially by permitting the sale of paper lotteries organized, conducted or promoted by every state government including the state of kerala provided that the prohibition imposed on the sale of computerized and online lottery tickets organized, conducted or promoted by every state government shall continue to remain in force and the territory of the state of kerala shall be online, internet and computerized lotteries free zone.by order of the governor.p. mara pandyan,secretary to governmentexplanatory note(this does not form part of the notification, but is intended to indicate its general purport).government of kerala by notification issued as g.o. (p) no. 66/2005/td dated 20th april, 2005, have reconsidered the issue of the prohibition imposed on the sale of all lottery tickets in the state of kerala and have decided to reintroduce paper lottery conducted by the state government with the same pattern and prize structure as it prevailed before 27th january, 2005.from a perusal of the notification dated 13.01.2015, issued by the government of kerala, we find that the state had prohibited the sale of all computerized and online lottery tickets marketed and operated through vending machines, terminals, electronic machines and tickets sold through internet in kerala. however, by notification dated 27.01.2005, the state had prohibited the sale of tickets of all lotteries in the state of kerala. vide notification dated 27.01.2005, the government of kerala made the kerala state lotteries (regulation) (repeal) rules, 2005 which repealed the entire kerala state lotteries (regulation) rules, 2003. vide another notification dated 22.04.2005, the government of kerala lifted the prohibition of sale of paper lotteries organized, conducted or promoted by every state government including the state of kerala. however, the prohibition imposed on the sale of computerized and online tickets continued to remain in force.13. in the 2010 rules, framed by the central government, online lottery has been defined under rule 2(1)(e) which is as under-'online lottery' means a system created to permit players to purchase lottery tickets generated by the computer or online machine at the lottery terminals where the information about the sale of a ticket and the player's choice of any particular number or combination of numbers is simultaneously registered with the central computer server;rule 3 permitted the state government to organize a paper lottery or online lottery or both subject to the conditions specified in the act and these rules. thus from the rules, it is clear that online lottery is being treated as a separate lottery from paper lottery and it is a class in itself.14. in the case on hand, we are mainly concerned with the provisions of section 5 and section 6 of the act. these two sections cover different fields. section 5 deals with prohibition of sale of tickets, whereas section 6 deals with prohibition of conduct of the lottery itself. so, section 5 enables the state government to prohibit the sale of tickets of lotteries run by every other state government. the grounds on which prohibition of sale of tickets can be made are not detailed under section 5. but, the same can be gathered from other provisions of the act and also by reference to the object and scheme of the act. going by the scheme of the act, it appears that violation of any of the conditions contained in section 4 could be a ground for the state government to prohibit the sale of tickets of a particular lottery, organized, conducted or promoted by any other state government. if the state government thinks it fit, it may prohibit the sale of all lottery tickets in the state and make it a lottery free zone. section 6 empowers the central government to prohibit a lottery run by the state government. the central government can prohibit the running of a lottery by a state government if it is found that the same is in violation of the provisions of section 4. the central government can also prohibit the running of a lottery if it is found that the tickets of that lottery are sold in a state, where the sale of the same has been prohibited by the concerned state government under section 5.15. in view of the above, it is relevant to mention entry 40 under list i and entry 34 in list ii of the seventh schedule and article 246 of the constitution of india which are as under:entry 40 list i-union list40. lotteries organized by the government of india or the government of a state.entry 34 list ii-state list34. betting and gambling.article 246 of the constitution246. subject matter of laws made by parliament and by the legislatures of states.--(1) notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3), parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list i in the seventh schedule (in this constitution referred to as the "union list").(2) notwithstanding anything in clause (3), parliament and, subject to clause (1), the legislature of any state also, have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list iii in the seventh schedule (in this constitution referred to as the "concurrent list").(3) subject to clauses (1) and (2), the legislature of any state has exclusive power to make laws for such state or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list ii in the seventh schedule (in this constitution referred to as the "state list"). (4) parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of india not included in a state notwithstanding that such matter is a matter enumerated in the state list.it is common case that the parliament, by virtue of entry 40 under list i of the seventh schedule, has got exclusive power to legislate on state lotteries,. by virtue of entry 34 in the state list, concerning betting and gambling, state legislatures have the power to legislate on lotteries, other than state lotteries because it is also one of the forms of gambling16. the state of sikkim, in its trading capacity, has been organizing, conducting and promoting online lotteries in accordance with the provisions of the act and lottery tickets are being sold in various lottery playing states in india including the state of kerala. the state of sikkim, as pleaded before this court, substantially depends on the revenue raised by the sale of lottery tickets. it is a north eastern state with no avenues of industrialization. it is the case of the appellants that they started the business of online lottery in the state of kerala in the year 2003. online lottery is a tamper proof lottery which has been designed using the aid of modern technology that eliminates all the ills of paper lottery and has greater transparency and is universally recognized as a tamper proof and safe method of conducting lotteries. modernization led to spurt of computerization, satellite and internet connectivity which bears a great impact on every aspect of life, made things easier and faster and brought in more transparency. thus began lottery in another form, popularly called "online lottery." the difference in the lotteries of this form is that "online" is free from possibility of any duplication, tamper etc., and is totally transparent.17. online lotteries became popular in our country, only recently. it made their presence felt in india from 2000-2001 onwards. though all types of lotteries are meant to be covered by the lotteries (regulation) act, 1998, the deleterious effect of paper lotteries was uppermost in the mind of the central government while bringing forth the above legislation as, at the relevant time, paper lotteries were most popular among the people. the various sub-sections of section 4 will reveal that the irregularities in the conduct of paper lotteries were mainly in the contemplation of the parliament. the decision in b.r. enterprises (supra) also dealt with the prohibition of sale of tickets of paper lotteries invoking power under section 5 of the act. still, the general principles laid down by this court in the abovementioned case, while interpreting section 5, are binding. so, the power to prohibit sale of tickets is granted in relation to a particular lottery or particular type of lottery. that means, a particular lottery can be the subject-matter of prohibition. in other words, all types of lotteries need not be prohibited. but, going by that decision, a particular type of lottery can be prohibited, if only, the state government also does not run that lottery. the online lottery is a particular lottery, which is not run by the state government. so, going by the principles laid down in b.r. enterprises (supra), the state government can separately ban the sale of online lotteries as online lottery is a particular class of lottery, different and distinct from paper lotteries.18. learned counsel for the appellants also brought into notice para 21 of the writ petition filed before the high court to show how the system of online lottery functions, which is as under:the online lottery involves installation of a central server, various terminals, which are connected to the said central server through a satellite and all this involves huge expenses running into hundred of crores. in this online lottery form, there are no pre-printed tickets as such. a person interested to purchase a ticket of online lottery comes to the terminal, fills a play-slip with numbers selected by him and hands it over to the person manning the terminal. this play-slip is put into the terminal and numbers selected by the player are transmitted to the central server, which registers the said numbers. a person may not like to select any numbers and may play lucky dip in which case the computers makes random generation of numbers itself and transmit them to the central server, which registers the said numbers. in either of the cases after the central server has registered the numbers, it generates a ticket and commands the terminal, which acts like a fax on command and delivers the ticket, which is on an imported thermal paper. the ticket besides containing these numbers contains various codes, details as also bar codes, which ensures against any possibility of any duplication etc. the game is made more interesting and entertaining since the player has option to choose numbers for himself. like paper lottery in this case also various tickets can be printed and sold as such, however, the same may not sell at all because the player does to like to lose the charm of selecting the numbers himself. however, whatever be the position, all the details regarding the number of tickets sold, their respective playing numbers, the number to tickets sold from each terminal etc. are all available in the central server. the generation of tickets for any particular scheme closes 30 minutes before the holding of the draw and no retail terminal can generate a ticket for such draw after such closing and at the time of draw all the details are readily available to the authorities immediately before the draw. the draw is held by the respective state themselves through a tamper free machine and is telecast on the zee television network and watched by the public at large.19. it was also contended before this court that in exercise of the powers conferred by section 5 of the act and in partial modification of the notification issued earlier declaring kerala a lottery free zone state, the government lifted the prohibition partially by permitting the sale of paper lotteries and the prohibition imposed on the sale of computerized and online lotteries continued to remain in force declaring the territory of kerala to be online, internet and computerized lottery free zone. the legislative competence in respect of state run lotteries vests exclusively with the centre except where a state is a lottery free state and that only the central government will have the power to deal with the same. the notification dated 22.04.2005 was issued by the state on the ground that the state of kerala shall be an online lottery free zone.20. the state of kerala is of the view that online lottery and conventional paper lotteries are to be dealt separately and are entirely different in every aspect by the nature and features inherent in it. the state of kerala is of the view that online lottery does not characterize the features of a lottery as defined under the act. in fact, the so-called online lottery is not a lottery as it is a widespread network using internet, cheating the public in a massive way in the absence of a proper regulatory system of the same standards. the online companies are merely 'gaming', but not conducting any lottery as per the guidelines issued under the act. it is further pleaded that though it is claimed that online lotteries are universally recognized as tamper proof lotteries, in experience, it is felt that the so-called online lotteries were cheating the massive gullible public by misusing the advancement of information technology in the field of economy. the government of kerala has detected and established before the union government that online lotteries organized by the state of sikkim are blatantly violating the provisions of section 4 of the act. it was further contended that the central act was enacted by the parliament on 07.07.1998. at the time of formulating the act, only conventional paper lottery was being conducted in the country. no online lottery existed at the time of enactment of the act. the central act did not envisage or took into account the online lotteries in the definition clause while stipulating conditions under section 4 of the act for organizing, conducting or promoting a lottery by a state government. the conditions stipulated therein are only intended to cover the conduct of paper lotteries. the government of kerala has detected the flagrant violations and fraud inherent in the online lotteries and also the illegal activities of the appellants which directly affects more than 15 lakhs people of kerala who have already been deceived and are being continuously cheated on minute to minute basis. the ill effects of these lotteries had assumed major dimensions in the state. the newspaper reports, petitions from the public and reports from the police reveal the magnitude of its ill effects, which include suicides, divorces, starvation and murders. this created more hardship to the respondent-state.21. the violations in terms of the act in the case of meghalaya, sikkim and nagaland state lotteries have already been furnished to the union government on 12.01.2004 and 23.08.2004, some of which mentioned by the division bench of the high court in the judgment are as follows:(a) the online lottery tickets of meghalaya, sikkim and nagaland states are printed by the terminal in violation of section 4(b) of the lotteries (regulation) act, 1998(b) the tickets of these states are printed in the stationery of the sole-selling agent.(c) the draws are conducted in such a manner that the transparency and credibility of the draw process is not at all established. according to meghalaya rules, the presence of one judge shall form the quorum.(d) the draws are conducted daily in a severe gambling fashion and in violation of section 4(h) and prizes are offered on the basis of a single digit violating section 4(a) of the act.(e) there are clear similarities in the name of different lotteries and they follow the same prize pattern, obviously making an attempt to circumvent section 4(h).it is then pleaded that in practice, the so-called online lotteries, mislead the general public by its mesmeric gambling instinct inherent in it. people are attracted to the modern technology used in these lotteries and the instantaneous nature of it. they spend all their time in front of the online outlets and spoil all their money. they are being trapped by the simple prizes they get and they invest the remaining part of their money in a hope to get more and more big prizes. this is a continuous process starting from early in the morning and extends too late in the night. the lotteries conducted by these online companies have draws in every 15 minutes. technically, they call it 'weekly lotteries' in order to circumvent the objectives of the act, but in result they are ridiculously setting aside the spirit of the act. as a technical argument, each lottery has only one draw in a week. the draw of one lottery repeats only in the next week. but, the tactics followed by these states is that they are conducting more than 100 lotteries with very strange names and by assigning pseudonyms. the online lotteries running in kerala were in flagrant violation of the provisions of the act and this fact was detected by the state of kerala. the state of kerala has made known this fact to the union government twice. the findings of the government of kerala revealed that the other states, on whose behalf the lotteries are being conducted in kerala, have least control over them and major source of income from these gambling type of lotteries siphoned by the so-called middlemen who acts in the name of 'sole selling agents'. similarly, the states of karnataka and arunachal pradesh have stopped the sale of online lotteries as they have admitted the violations pointed out by the state of kerala. online lotteries are being conducted under the name of other state governments, circumventing the provisions of the act, and also the single digit lotteries through dubious methods adopted by their distributors and agents. in some cases, some lotteries except one digit all other digits will be pre-fixed and the buyer has to choose only a single digit. in some other cases, one digit of two digit number or of three digit number will be changing continuously, but in a pre-determined cyclic manner, which shows that the draw is held only for one digit. it was detected from the lottery terminals that the tickets of states of meghalaya and nagaland are being printed one after another from the same terminal and the same pool in an unbroken manner. several tickets without the imprint and logo of other state governments and even without signature of the authorized officer of those states have been found being sold in the state of kerala. standard set of rules are printed on the reverse side of the stationery and tickets of more than one states are being printed on the same material, by the same terminal in unbroken strips. the proceeds of the sale of online lotteries are rather shared by the distributors and agents without crediting in the public account of the respective states, in violation of the provisions of the act. the details of unclaimed money are not brought to the knowledge of the other state governments, whereas the unclaimed prize money is being appropriated by the distributors and agents. the place of draw is not at all located within the other states, whereas the same is being conducted according to the convenience of the distributors. the lottery distributors and agents of other state governments are resorting to such unscrupulous methods and conducting online lotteries in every 15 minutes from the lottery terminals. the lottery department of the state had detected the draws being conducted in lottery outlets for more than 49 draws in a day.22. the provisions in respect of sikkim state lotteries was reported to the ministry of home affairs, government of india on 12.01.2004. the scheme of lotteries furnished by the government of sikkim revealed that they were not in conformity with the provisions of section 4 of the act. the irregularities/violations in respect of the sikkim lotteries being sold in kerala in the year 2004 were brought to the notice of the state government earlier with a request for further documents/clarifications. some of these violations/irregularities are briefly mentioned below:i. on a perusal of the agreement between the government of sikkim and m/s. tashi delek gaming solutions pvt. ltd., the marketing agent, it is seen that the agreement with the marketing agent is executed seven days before the sikkim online network lottery rules came into effect.ii the marketing agent is vested with powers more than what the lottery regulation act permits. the state of sikkim was asked to offer specific remarks on this.iii. since a detailed description of the method of draw was not furnished by the state of sikkim, the same was called for from this office.iv. as per rule 12 of the sikkim online network lottery rules, 2001, the tickets will be printed on pre-printed ticket material. on perusal of the tickets of super-lotto and thunder ball it is seen that the specimen play slips furnished by the director of lotteries, sikkim bear the imprint and logo of playwin. this shows that the tickets are instantly printed at the retail computer terminal, violating section 4(b) of the lotteries regulation act, 1998.v. the contractual agreement between the play win sub-agent and the distributors was not furnished. so also the names of distributors for certain districts in kerala were not furnished.vi. the government has furnished the details of 926 retail outlets operating in the state. but the contractual agreement between the distributor and these retail outlets were not submitted.vii. the marketing agent under the sikkim state lotteries is empowered to set-up the required infrastructure and use of technology for the draw purpose. it is clearly more than what is statutorily permissible under section 4(c) of the act.viii. as per section 4(e) of the central act, 'the state government itself shall conduct the draws of all the lotteries.' but actual conduct of the draws is done by the marketing agent, reducing the role of the state government to that of a mere spectator, thereby violating the above provision.ix. the thunderball, the last prize amount of rs. 20/- is 'when one main number and the thunder ball (fixed) are matched.' until clarifications to the contrary are provided with evidence, it has to be presumed that this is a camouflaged single digit lottery specifically prohibited under section 4(a) of the central act.it was also pointed out in the letter to the government of india that sikkim has delegated more rights and responsibilities to the marketing agents than what is statutorily permissible under the act. however, regarding the appointment of marketing agents, the state of sikkim has informed that they will discuss the matter with the legal wing. the state of sikkim has admitted that the tickets are printed on playwin stationery, clearly admitting violation of section 4(b) of the act. with regard to the allegation that 'thunder ball' lottery is being organized on the basis of single digit, the state of sikkim has not offered any reasonable explanation or furnished any document instead the state has merely refuted the same. even though the state of sikkim was requested to furnish details/documents/clarifications regarding the allegations raised, no reply was received from it. the government of sikkim was reminded on 11.05.2004 and 15.06.2004 to furnish the details called for earlier and also to provide details of the new lotteries introduced by them in kerala. there has been no response from the state so far. thus the violations and irregularities pointed out in respect of sikkim state lotteries as in january, 2004 continue unabated. this shows that the government of sikkim is not inclined to address the serious issues pointed out by the government of kerala with regard to the illegalities and violations connected with sikkim state lottery tickets which are being sold among the public in kerala.conclusion:23. the conduct of certain types of lottery trade in the country, the malpractices thereof and their impact on the poorer sections of the society have been under scrutiny of the government for quite some time. the continued prevalence of the popularly known single digit and instant lotteries and the temptation offered by them proved to be the undoing of many families, especially poor daily wagers and low income groups. in spite of the guidelines issued by the central government over a period of time as also the guidelines issued in the recent past by this court, the evil has not been totally eliminated.24. the relevant provisions of the act clearly demonstrate that even though all types of lotteries are meant to be regulated by the said act, online lotteries were not under the contemplation of the central government at the time when the act came into force. it is otherwise also not a disputed fact that online lotteries became popular insofar as india is concerned only recently and in any case after the enforcement of the act and that is why the government of india while framing the 2010 rules specifically defined 'online lotteries'. having this background in mind, the scheme of the act would clearly show that the government at that stage was concerned with paper lotteries of all kinds. from the preamble of the act spelled out from the statement of objects and reasons as re-produced hereinbefore, the necessity to bring about legislation in the matter of regulating lotteries was felt on account of continued prevalence of single digit and instant lotteries. it was primarily done to curb malpractices in the conduct of such lotteries which at that time were paper lotteries only when the act came into force.25. with regard to the contention regarding the function of the online lottery, we are of the considered view that any type of manipulation can be done in the printing of tickets at the terminal. the customer cannot know whether the ticket is printed at the terminal based on the command from the central server or not. the state of sikkim does not have any control over its thousands of terminals all over india. as per section 4(h) of the act, the draw should be held once in a week. it means a fortune seeker, after purchasing the ticket, will get a week's cooling time to wait for the result of the draw. but, under the scheme of online lotteries, a number of lotteries run simultaneously. so, by holding several lotteries, there can be several draws with a gap of few minutes in a day and the gullible will remain glued and there is every likelihood of purchase of tickets repeatedly, till all his savings are exhausted. so, if the government takes a decision in public interest to prohibit online lotteries, this court should not interfere with the said decision unless there are compelling grounds. as held earlier, going by section 5, as interpreted by this court in b.r. enterprises (supra), the sale of ticket of a particular lottery can be prohibited provided the concerned state government is not running that lottery. while interpreting a statute of this nature meant to suppress the mischief of gambling, this court should accept the concept of purposive interpretation and if possible save the notification intending to save the people from the vice of gambling.26. it is common case that lottery is a species of gambling. gambling is considered as a pernicious vice by all civilized societies from time immemorial. the rigvedas, smritis and arthashastras have condemned gambling as a vice. several judges and learned authors are unanimous in their condemnation of gambling. experience has shown that the common forms of gambling are comparatively innocuous when placed in contrast with widespread pestilence of lotteries. the former are confined to a few persons and places, but the latter infests the whole community; it enters every dwelling; it reaches every class; it preys upon the hard earnings of the poor; it plunders the ignorant and the simple.27. in words and phrases, butterworths, 3nd edition at page 71, it is stated as follows:it must not be entirely forgotten in the construction of these acts of parliament (see now the lotteries and amusements act, 1976) that the evil which the lottery law has sought to prevent was the evil which existed where poor people with only a few pence to feed their children would go and put these few pence into a lottery and lose them, and this sociologically was a bad thing....28. even in b.r. enterprises (supra), this court has held as under:47. from the references from dharmashastra, opinions of distinguished authors, references in the encyclopaedia britcannica and boston law review and others we find that each concludes, as we have observed, lottery remains in the realm of gambling. even where it is state-sponsored still it was looked down upon as an evil. right from ancient time till the day all expressed concern to eliminate this, even where it was legalized for raising revenue either by the king or in the modern times by the state. even this legitimization was for the sole purpose of raising revenue, was also for a limited period, since this received condemnation even for this limited purpose. all this gives a clear picture of the nature and character of lottery as perceived through the conscience of the people, as revealed through ancient scriptures, also by various courts of the countries.this court further added:59. .....but it cannot be doubted and it is recognized by all the countries that gambling by its very nature promises to make a poor man a rich man; to quench the thirst of a man in dire economic distress or to a man with a bursting desire to become wealthy overnight it draws them into the magnetic field of lotteries with crippling effect. more often than not, such hopes with very remote chance encourages the spirit of reckless prosperity (sic propensity) in him, ruining him and his family. this encouraging hope with the magnitude of prize money never dwindles. losses and failures in lotteries instead of disencouragement increases the craze with intoxicating hope, not only to erase the losses but to fill his imaginative coffer. when this chance mixes with this utopian hope, he is repeatedly drawn back into the circle of lottery like a drug addict. inevitably, the happiness of his family is lost. he goes into a chronic state of indebtedness....29. article 246(1) of the constitution of india deals with exclusive power of the parliament to make laws with respect to matters enumerated in list i (union list) in the seventh schedule. as per article 246(2), parliament and the legislature of any state also have power to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in list iii (concurrent list) in the seventh schedule. the legislature of the state has, however, exclusive power to make laws with respect to matters enumerated in list ii (state list) in the seventh schedule, as per article 246(3) of the constitution. also, there being a specific entry dealing with lotteries, the power to legislate on lotteries would be in the exclusive domain of the parliament, even though it is a form of gambling and would be generally covered under item no. 34 of list ii (state list). the parliament, in exercise of the power vested in it to enact law on lotteries as per item no. 40 of list i (union list), enacted the lotteries (regulation) act, 1998. section 3 of the act ordains that save as otherwise provided in section 4, no state government shall organize, conduct or promote any lottery. a state government has been authorized to organize, conduct or promote a lottery, subject to the conditions enumerated in section 4 which has already been re-produced earlier. it is absolutely clear that even though the power to legislate on lotteries vests exclusively with the parliament, the respective states have been delegated this power, but it has to be subject to conditions enumerated in section 4. by virtue of the provisions contained in section 12 of the act, the government may, by notification in the official gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of the act. exercising the powers vested in it by the provisions contained in section 12, the state of kerala has framed the "kerala paper lotteries (regulation) rules, 2005."30. provisions of the act, in particular, section 12 of the act clearly manifest that even though the power to legislate on the subject 'lotteries' is in the exclusive domain of the parliament, the power to legislate as well has been delegated by the parliament to the respective states in the country and as mentioned above, it is in exercise of that power the state of kerala has indeed framed the rules of 2005. it is significant to mention that section 5 further authorizes a state government to prohibit the sale of tickets of the lottery organized, conducted or promoted by every other state. section 5 of the act was, however, under a serious challenge in b.r. enterprises (supra). framed in somewhat different language, the challenge to section 5 was that the delegation to the state to decide to prohibit the sale of lotteries organized by other states is a delegation by parliament of its essential legislative power, without any policy or bereft of the guidelines and that there was total abdication of the legislative power of the parliament which was a naked delegation, hence, violative of article 14 of the constitution of india. the counter contention raised by the states and, in particular, the state of tamil nadu which had banned lotteries of other states, but continued to have its own, was that on a plain reading of section 5, a state without banning its own lotteries can ban lotteries organized by other states. the union of india and also the state of u.p. had raised a contention that section 5 should be read as to entitle only such state to ban which, as a policy, does not permit its own lottery to run. if this be so, possibly there could be no discrimination as it would apply uniformly to all the states. on the respective contentions of the learned counsel as mentioned above, this court framed the question as follows:81. the legal principle which emerges, as submitted, is that delegation of essential legislative power of the principal to the delegatee would amount to abdication of its legislative power and if it is bereft of any guidelines then it is unsustainable in the eye of the law....while dealing with the question aforesaid, this court first recorded reasons as to why the power had been delegated by the union to the states. it was inter alia observed as follows:83. as revealed from anraj case-i some of the states sought permission of the union as a policy to raise their revenue through these lotteries, which was conferred by the presidential order under article 258(1), though it records, the state could have exercised their discretion as a policy to have their own lotteries without such permission in view of its extended executive power under article 298. it further reveals, till parliament makes any law, the decision to start its lottery or to close it is exclusively within the executive power of each state. this is because it is the policy decision of a state which has to decide as a principle whether it desires to collect in this form the revenue or not. the benefit of article 298 is, it is extraterritorial, applicable beyond its territory, it is for this state lotteries are places in entry 40 list i. so in a federal structure, union has to play a role to coordinate between one state with the other. so by regulation it has to subserve the objectives. the union cannot force a state to gamble if such a state does not want to gamble. to run its own lotteries or to close it is left on the discretion of each state. it is each state which has to decide its policy and has to be concerned about its subject. in any case, the union cannot force any state that it must run its own lotteries. but control of state lotteries running in the territory of other states is left on the union. the state cannot restrict sales of lotteries organized by other states even in its territory unless authorized by the union. this difficulty was felt by the state which is indicated in anraj case-i. that seems to be the reason that parliament has delegated this power to the state under section 5....31. after taking into consideration the background leading to delegation of power by union to the states, the question as to whether the delegation could be construed to be such as amounting to delegation of its essential legislative power and that too unguided or unbridled was examined. the question was answered as follows:84. in section 2(b) lotteries are defined to be a scheme for distribution of prizes by a lot or chance. this definition itself recognizes that even in state lotteries the prizes are to be collected by chance without any skill, hence gambling in nature. section 3 prohibits that no state lotteries can be organized without the condition stipulated under clauses (a) to (k) of section 4. section 4 provides the conditions to be complied with by the state lotteries. to initiate any state lottery it is left to the policy of each state, for this act is silent. the only control is, in case it decides, then it must follow the conditions as laid down under section 4. next comes section 5 which is subject matter of challenge, the delegation of power to the state to prohibit the sale of lottery tickets organized by every other state. if a state desires not to subject its people to the lottery gambling, it has no power to restrict lotteries organized by other states. it is to remove this mischief that power is conferred through delegation to the states to do it in terms of their own policy. by virtue of this, now the state government can prohibit sale of lottery tickets of every other state within its territory. next, section 6 seeks strict compliance with section 4.under this the central government may prohibit any state lottery which is being conducted in contravention of the conditions as laid down under section 4 or section 5. section 7 shows the rigour of this act by making it a penal offence as against all, who violate the provisions of this act, be it the head of the department of the government or the agent, promoter or trader, to be punishable with two years rigorous imprisonment. section 8 makes such an offence cognizable and non-bailable. similarly, section 9 deals with offences committed by the companies. section 10 entrusts the central government power to give directions to the state government for carrying into execution the provisions of this act, rule or order. sections 11 and 12 are the rule-making power entrusted to the central and the state governments respectively. section 13 repeals the ordinance. thus, the whole act makes clear that the subject it is dealing with is gambling in nature. the object of the act is not to control the policy decision of each state to start or to close its lotteries, but to regulate it in case a state decides to run its own lottery through modalities and conditions laid down therein. emphasis of the whole act is to abide by the conditions strictly if you want to run a lottery. thus, regulation is through conditions to eliminate even the remotest possibility of malpractices by providing stringent measures for its compliance. perusal of the act reveals, the scheme of the act is limited in its application, and it admits the subject it is dealing is gambling in nature. as we have said, the decision to collect or not to collect revenue through state lotteries is exclusively within the policy decision of the state and for this, neither the union nor parliament interferes nor is there any indication under the act. thus, the question which remains is, if any state decides that it does not want any lotteries but if it feels helpless as having no jurisdiction over the lotteries organized by other states, what is the way out? this can only be done by parliament or by entrusting this power on such state desiring so, which has been done through section 5. in this background, for this helplessness of a state as recorded in anraj case-i [manu/sc/0336/1984manu/sc/0336/1984 : (1984) 2 scc 292] the remedy is provided by entrusting this power on the state under the impugned provision. this helps such state to achieve its objective of lottery (gambling) free zone within its territory. a well-concerned remedy. next question is what could have been the guideline? if state lotteries are gambling and it cannot be terms as 'trade and commerce' at common parlance for any free right under the constitution. such right though recognized under article 298, so other states may continue to enjoy till prohibited by valid law, and if any state wants within its state lottery-free zone and for which the power is entrusted to such state, it cannot be said in this setting and background and the nature of the subject that such a delegation is of its essential legislative power. the only guideline necessary in such delegation is to see that the state does not pick and choose one state from the other, which guideline is already provided in this section. it provides that such a ban could only be if it is applied to every other state. the only residual field of attack so far as this delegation could be, which has been attacked in this case, that the state could on one hand ban lotteries of every other state but run its own lotteries. it is argued that while a state bans lotteries of other states not to permit any gambling activity in the public interest as a policy but this very public interest is flouted by having lotteries of its own. it is true that unless this provision is read down to mean a state can only ban lotteries of other states when it bans as a policy its own lotteries it is bound to be subjected to the vagaries as pointed out and on deeper scrutiny it may not successfully stand. but, by reading down the provision, which has to be read that it is only that state which decides lottery-free zone within its state can prohibit lotteries of other states clearly provides the guidance for the exercise of such a power. it is inbuilt and inherent in the provision itself in view of the scheme of the act and nature of subject in issue. if interpretation as given on behalf of the state of tamil nadu is accepted that delegation of power is absolute, then the submission that such delegation is unbridled without any guideline carries great weight. submission for the state of tamil nadu is that the lotteries may be prohibited in phases, viz. while running its own lotteries yet prohibiting other lotteries, may be as a public policy, for law and order, for political reasons, morality, etc. for surviving such an interpretation given by mr. ganguli, parliament should have provided some guidelines. such an interpretation falls into the trap of the submission that this delegation is unbridled. so, if there are two interpretations, the interpretation which upholds the validity should be accepted. so, the interpretation as given by mr. ganguli cannot be accepted.85. there are two parts of the attack of the delegation of power to the state under section 5. the latter part, by which it can prohibit sale of lottery tickets organized by every state which leaves no scope of any discretion on the states to discriminate from one state to other. so if it decides no lottery tickets of any state to be sold it cannot pick and choose from one state to the other.once it, as a policy, decides to prohibit the sale of lottery tickets of other states it must prohibit every other state, that is to say, all the states and such a delegation cannot be said to be either abdication of the legislative power of parliament or to be unbridled or unguided. as we have said looking to the nature of the subject and object of the act which is to help each state in its endeavor to run state lotteries which would include starting or closing its lotteries and when a state wants to have lottery-free zone in its state, then such a delegation to ban lottery of every other state cannot be said to be invalid. to the first part, there are two interpretation, one on the plain reading of section 5, a state may run its own lottery yet may prohibit the sale of lotteries of other states. this construction leads to discrimination and opens for criticism of unbridled delegation. the submission further is, if the ban of sale of lottery tickets of every other state is as a public policy, affecting the morality and resultant ill effect on its subject then there is no justification that the state may run its own lottery affecting the very subject for which the power is exercised prohibiting the lotteries of other states. it is true, if such an interpretation is accepted then this submission has a force. on the other hand, on behalf of the union the submission is that the language of the section has to be read down. the decision to have its lottery or not to have its lottery has to be in the public interest. every decision to have either lotteries authorized by the state or organized by the state has to be in public interest. may be for collection of public revenue or for a public purpose. it has been held in central inland water transport corporation ltd. v. brojo nath ganguly air para 93:there must be no injury or harm to the public interest, public good and public welfare.thus, the decision to run state lottery has to be made with the conscience (sic consciousness) of its evil consequences on its subject. thus before deciding the state has to equate the public welfare with the injury on its public. it may be in a given case within the limitation of its financial capacity with the need of the hour it has to decide to run its own lotteries to augment its revenue in the larger interest of the public which if weighed with the evil consequences on its subject, the public welfare gains more by running it then the evil consequence on its subject has to give way till the situation changes by finding a better way for this additional source or evil consequences inflicting on its subject overweighing. this exercise has to be by each state, the union not coming in its way. it is for each state to decide what is its public welfare and what constitutes an injury to the public interest. rattan chand hira chand v. askar nawaz jung holds, what constitutes public interest or welfare would depend upon the time. the social milieu in which the contract is sought to be enforced would decide the factum, the nature and the degree of injury.86. so, whenever a state decides to run or not to run its lotteries it is the state which has to decide as a public policy in the public interest. once such a decision is taken to have its state lottery-free zone, the entrustment of power by parliament cannot be said to be ultra vires.87. we find on plain reading of section 5, it empowers the state government within its state to prohibit the sale of tickets of the lotteries organized by every other state. there is also nothing in the language reading by itself so as to say, whether such power can be exercised by the state while running its own lottery or can be exercised only where such state does not run its own lottery. this leads to two possible interpretations, as referred to above. in view of settled principle of interpretations, the interpretation given by the union to read down the provision has substance. this would mean that the state could only exercise such discretion if it decides not to have any lottery within its territory including its own lottery. in this situation, the delegatee is tied down by this limitation which itself is a clear guide to a state hence cannot be said to be unbridled delegation. so even to the first part it cannot be said to be arbitrary or unbridled. so, we have no hesitation to approve the interpretation given by the union to uphold the validity of section 5.32. from the observations made by this court, as extracted above, learned counsel representing the appellants contended that the state of kerala could not prohibit any form of lottery as long as it was running other forms of lottery of other states as also of the state of kerala. after having given anxious thought to the rival contentions, we are not inclined to accept the contention raised by learned senior counsel for the appellants.33. it may be reiterated that the question that came to be framed by this court on the rival contentions raised by the counsel for the parties in b.r. enterprises (supra) was as to whether the delegation of essential legislative power of the principal to a delegatee would amount to abdication of its legislative power and if it is bereft of any guidelines then is it unsustainable in the eyes of law. this court held that if the state decides that it does not want any lotteries but if it feels helpless as having no jurisdiction over the lotteries organized by other states, it can only be done by the parliament or by entrusting this power on such state desiring so, which has been done through section 5. the remedy is provided by entrusting this power on the state under section 5. this would help the state to achieve its objective of 'lottery free zone' within its territory. while dealing with the guidelines, this court further observed that if a state may want it to be a lottery-free zone, it could not be said that such delegation would be of essential legislative power. the only guideline necessary in such a delegation is to see that the state does not pick and choose one state from the other, which guideline is already provided in the section. if the ban is applied to all the states and also the state banning lotteries, the contention that delegation was excessive, uncanalised and unbridled would lose its sting. we are satisfied that by virtue of the provisions contained in section 12 of the act, the centre has delegated its power to legislate with regard to lotteries to states and further that there is specific delegation with regard to ban of lotteries of other states by virtue of the provisions contained in section 5 of the act. this delegation of legislative power of the principal to the delegatee would not amount to abdication of legislative power by the centre and it would not be without any guidelines and would be sustainable in law if the concerned state may ban a lottery in its own state and of other states as well. what is true with regard to the total ban of lotteries of other states, in our view, would also be true with regard to a particular kind of lottery as the delegation of power has been held to be valid if the power by the delegatee may be used uniformly in its own state and also with regard to the other states. in the context of the facts and circumstances of the case as fully detailed above, we hold that when the state of kerala may prohibit a particular kind of lottery from its own state, it can prohibit sale of such lottery from any other state and that would not be unsustainable in the eyes of law nor it could be against law as held by this court in b.r. enterprises (supra).34. we also hold that it is not a case of abdication of legislative power and would not be bereft of any guidelines if the legislation banning lotteries was applied uniformly. we, on the interpretation of the point on the issue of delegation of essential legislative power bereft of any guidelines, hold that it is not a case of abdication of the legislative power of the centre and further that if the ban on the online lottery applies uniformly, it would not be a case of exercising power by a delegatee without any guidelines.35. in the case of the senior electric inspector (supra), this court, while considering as to whether the doctrine of contemporanea expositio can be applied in construing acts which are comparatively modern, held as under:the legal position may be summarized thus: the maxim contemporanea expositio as laid down by coke was applied to construing ancient statutes but not to interpreting acts which are comparatively modern. there is a good reason for this change in the mode of interpretation. the fundamental rule of construction is the same whether the court is asked to construe a provision of an ancient statute or that of a modern one, namely, what is the expressed intention of the legislature. it is perhaps difficult to attribute to a legislative body functioning in a static society that its intention was couched in terms of considerable breadth so as to take within its sweep the future development comprehended by the phraseology used. it is more reasonable to confine its intention only to the circumstances obtaining at the time the law was made. but in a modern progressive society it would be unreasonable to confine the intention of a legislature to the meaning attributable to the modern legislature to the meaning attributable to the modern legislature making laws to govern a society which is fast moving must be presumed to be aware of an enlarged meaning the same concept might attract with the march of time and with the revolutionary changes brought about in social, economic, political and scientific and other field of human activity. indeed, unless a contrary intention appears, an interpretation should be given to the words used to take in new facts and situations, if the words are capable of comprehending them.36. in state v. s.j. choudhary (supra), this court in paragraph 10 had referred to a passage contained in statutory interpretation by francis bennion, second edition for holding that the indian evidence act, 1872 is by its very nature is an "ongoing act". paragraph 10 of the judgment is reproduced below:(2) it is presumed that parliament intends the court to apply to an ongoing act a construction that continuously updates its wording to allow for changes since the act was initially framed (an updating construction). while it remains law, it is to be treated as always speaking. this means that in its application on any date, the language of the act, though necessarily embedded in its own time, is nevertheless to be construed in accordance with the need to treat it as current law.***in the comments that follow it is pointed out that an ongoing act is taken to be always speaking. it is also, further, stated thus:in construing an ongoing act, the interpreter is to presume that parliament intended the act to be applied at any future time in such a way as to give effect to the true original intention. accordingly the interpreter is to make allowances for any relevant changes that have occurred, since the act's passing, in law, social conditions, technology, the meaning of words, and other matters. just as the us constitution is regarded as 'a living constitution', so an ongoing british act is regarded as 'a living act'. that today's construction involves the supposition that parliament was catering long ago for a state of affairs that did not then exist is no argument against that construction. parliament, in the wording of an enactment, is expected to anticipate temporal developments. the drafter will try to foresee the future, and allow for it in the wording.***an enactment of former days is thus to be read today, in the light of dynamic processing received over the years, with such modification of the current meaning of its language as will now give effect to the original legislative intention. the reality and effect of dynamic processing provides the gradual adjustment. it is constituted by judicial interpretation, year in and year out. it also comprises processing by executive officials.37. similarly, in sil import usa (supra), this court has again reiterated as follows:16. francis bennion in statutory interpretation has stressed the need to interpret a statute by making "allowances for any relevant changes that have occurred, since the act's passing, in law, social conditions, technology, the meaning of words, and other matters".17. for the need to update legislations, the courts have the duty to use interpretative process to the fullest extent permissible by the enactment. the following passage at p. 167 of the above book has been quoted with approval by a three-judge bench of this court in state v. s.j. choudhary:it is presumed that parliament intends the court to apply to an ongoing act a construction that continuously updates its wording to allow for changes since the act was initially framed (an updating construction). while it remains law, it is to be treated as always speaking. this means that in its application on any date, the language of the act, though necessarily embedded in its own time, is nevertheless to be construed in accordance with the need to treat it as current law.38. with the ongoing development in the field of science and technology, even though the online lotteries were not in vogue in 1998 when the parliament had passed the act, it came into existence at a later point of time. the principles laid down by this court in b.r. enterprises (supra) would apply to the paper lotteries which were in existence at that point of time. the principles laid down therein would also apply to online lotteries or internet lotteries by treating them as a separate class. the principle laid down therein is that if the state government has to prohibit any lottery organized, conducted or promoted by every other state, it has to prohibit the sale of its own lottery also. meaning thereby, if a paper lottery is being prohibited by a particular state then that paper lottery has to be prohibited as a whole. likewise, if online or internet lottery is to be prohibited by a state then that online lottery or internet lottery of all states including that state also has to be prohibited. viewed from this angle, we are of the considered opinion that state of kerala was well within its rights to prohibit the sale of online or internet lotteries in its state and there is no fault in it. it is well within the powers conferred on it under section 5 of the act. a state government can organize, conduct or promote a lottery subject to conditions mentioned in section 4 and if there is any violation of the conditions mentioned in section 4, it would be always open to the state government to prohibit such lottery and that would be within the legislative power vested with the state under section 5 of the act as in that case the state would be only complying with the provisions of the act made by the parliament. the learned single judge while examining the facts of the case, manner and method in which the sale of online lotteries are conducted, has already held that it violates the provisions contained in section 4 of the act. in fact, during the course of arguments, no effort was made to dislodge the findings recorded by the courts below. the view adopted from the observation made by this court in b.r. enterprises (supra), in any case, is possible.39. in our considered opinion, learned single judge of the high court rightly mentioned in his judgment that "in fairness, it must be conceded that section 5, in the light of the interpretation in b.r. enterprises (supra), admits two interpretations. one is that the state can prohibit any form of lottery, if only it is not running any lottery at all. the second interpretation is that the state can prohibit a particular form of lottery, if it is not running that form of lottery, even if it is running other types of lotteries. the act has been designedly made to suppress the mischief of lottery. therefore, we feel that an interpretation, which advances the object of the act, should be favoured. that means, the state can prohibit online lotteries, if it is not running the said type of lotteries. the decision in b.r. enterprises (supra), which was dealing with the prohibition of paper lotteries, does not stand in the way of accepting such an interpretation. accordingly, the main challenge against the impugned notification that it violates section 5 of the act is repelled.40. in view of the foregoing discussion, we do not find any infirmity in the order passed by the division bench of the high court dated 23.05.2006, consequently, the appeals and the writ petitions fail and are accordingly dismissed. however, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
1. the appellant which is government of assam undertaking is engaged in the manufacturing of formalim, menthol and carbon dioxide. it set up its unit somewhere in the 1970s. the government of india issued two notifications viz. notification no. 32/99-c.e. and notification no. 33/99-c.e. both dated 8-7-1999 whereby benefit of exemption from payment of central excise duty was extended to factories in north eastern states. this benefit was made available to those who set up new industrial units on or after 24th december, 1997. it was also made available to the existing industrial units if they increased their production capacity by 25%. in para 3 of the notification conditions were laid down which were to be satisfied in this behalf. this para reads as under:"3. the exemption contained in this notification shall apply only to the following kind of units namely:(a) new industrial units which have commenced their commercial production on or after the 24th day of december, 1997.(b) industrial units existing before the 24th day of december, 1997 but which have undertaken substantial expansion by way of increase in installed capacity by not less than twenty five percent on or after the 24th day of december, 1997."as mentioned above, appellant was an existing industrial unit. it extended its capacity by more than 50%. machinery, etc., for this purpose was installed on 30-9-1997. however, the production started on 16-2-1998. as pointed out above, in order to get the benefit the substantial expansion had to be undertaken on or after 24-12-1997.2. the appellant endeavored to seek the benefit of the aforesaid notice contending that since the production was started only on 16-2-1998, which was after 24-12-1997 it was entitled to the benefit of the said circular. the department, however, denied the same on the ground that the installation took place before the cutoff date that is 30-9-1997 and not thereafter. against this view taken by the adjudicating authority, the appellant preferred the appeal before the cestat which has also dismissed the appeal [2004 (170) e.l.t. 306 (tri.-del.)]. in arriving at the aforesaid conclusion, the tribunal has mentioned that the language of the para 3(b) clearly states that the substantial expansion should have been undertaken after 24-12-1997 whereas in the present case it was undertaken much before, i.e., on 30-9-1997. in the process, it has also contrasted the language of clause 3(b) with clause 3(a) noticing that clause 3(a) mentions 'commercial production' whereas clause 3(b) talks of 'undertaken substantial expansion'. the tribunal also referred to central board of excise and customs clarification letter f. no. 354/08/98-tru, dated 9-7-1999. on the aforesaid basis following conclusion is arrived at by the tribunal:"after careful consideration we do not find any ambiguity in the language of the notifications. the notifications as well as c.b.e. & c.'s clarifications relied upon by the appellants are very clear that in the case of existing manufacturing units, the rate on which the capacity of the unit is enhanced, should be the relevant date in terms of clause 3(b) of the notifications. the date of commencement of commercial production is mentioned in clause 3(a) of the notification, is applicable to the new industrial units only. we also agree with the commissioner (appeals) that clause (4) of the notifications regarding commercial production applies only to new units. the appellants' unit is existing unit and the expansion was completed prior to 24-12-1997."we are in agreement with the aforesaid interpretation given by the tribunal to the said circular. therefore, we find no merit in this appeal and it is accordingly dismissed.
a.m. khanwilkar, j.1. this writ petition under article 32 of the constitution of india has been filed by an advocate practicing before this court raising public interest issue regarding illegal selling of "prohibited/nsp bore-weapons" obtained by the army personnel through central ordinance depot (cod), jabalpur on the basis of the order passed by the allotment committee. it is alleged that the weapons have been sold to the general public including to persons with criminal records, in breach of relevant rules and provisions of the arms act, 1959. the petitioner has relied on the enquiry report of the collector, sriganganagar, dated 3rd july, 2007 which, according to him, has enlisted the names of army personnel, who had indulged in illegal sale of such prohibited weapons to the general public and people having a criminal background, including anti-social elements and terrorists. the petitioner has also referred to another instance of registration of various cases by the central bureau of investigation (cbi) under sections 465, 468, 471 and 420 read with 120-b indian penal code in the district of jammu regarding issuance of around 30,000 armed licenses by the concerned officials/district magistrate between 1994 to 1998. that has been enquired into. the enquiry revealed active connivance between various arms dealers of jammu, delhi, punjab & haryana and rajasthan in violation of established procedure prescribed by the arms act; and that in majority of cases the original addressee/applicant was not traceable at the given address. according to the petitioner, the licensing authority even in the state of rajasthan and in particular sriganganagar district, a border state of india have reportedly granted arms licenses without due verification. the petitioner has relied on newspaper reports in the state of rajasthan to buttress this plea. he also relies on the enquiry report dated 03.07.2007 of the collector, sriganganagar. according to the petitioner, no follow up action has been taken by the concerned authority of the state of rajasthan in spite of the said report. the petitioner has, therefore, prayed that an enquiry be directed through an independent agency like cbi to unravel the conspiracy and to take action against the concerned officers including army personnel involved in the stated arms license scandal in the district of sriganganagar, rajasthan. direction is also sought against the home ministry, state of rajasthan to forthwith cancel all licenses issued without due verification/identification in violation of arms act, 1959. the petitioner has also sought direction against the union of india to strictly follow the provisions of the arms act, 1959; and to frame strict guidelines mandating all the officials/licensing authority of the states throughout the country to ensure due verification through the home ministry on the basis of report called from the concerned police station about the antecedents of the applicant and not by the collector, before issuing license. it is further prayed that the ministry of defence, government of india, must initiate appropriate action against the concerned army personnel who have been named by the collector in the preliminary enquiry report dated 3rd july, 2007.2. after notice was issued by the court, the respondents in particular state authorities were called upon to produce enquiry report of the additional district collector, sriganganagar in a sealed cover. that report has been submitted. as the matter proceeded, the court vide order dated 30th july, 2010 issued further directions to the state of rajasthan to place on record a status report regarding the proceedings initiated after registration of fir. the court perused the affidavit filed by the major o.p. sharma who was serving as adjutant 1, air formation signal regiment, new delhi, wherein it is mentioned that out of 41 officers, one jco and 4 retired officers, who had sold their non service pattern (nsp) weapon in violation of the provisions of the arms act and special army order 1/s/1996, four officers retrieved their weapons and administrative action against them was in progress. six officers had retired. the civil administration was asked to proceed against all the 10 retired officers. the remaining officers were facing disciplinary action under the army act for which necessary action was initiated. the court, however, recorded its dissatisfaction and called upon the ministry of defence to file a proper and comprehensive affidavit giving details about the action taken against the officers concerned. in furtherance of this direction, affidavit has been filed by the authorized officer, on 18th february, 2011. the court after perusing the relevant record regarding the details and status of the investigation in 14 first information reports/cases and the affidavit of additional superintendent of police, sriganganagar observed that in view of the magnitude and seriousness of the allegations leveled against some of the ias officers in the state, the chief secretary of the state must file a comprehensive status report along with a proper affidavit. accordingly, the chief secretary filed affidavit, sworn on 8th march, 2011, giving relevant information about the progress of the respective cases. further status reports have been filed from time, to time during the further hearing.3. on 30th april, 2013, the petitioner appearing in person had argued that in spite of the gravity of the misconduct/criminal offences committed by numerous army personnel ranging from the lower ranks to the higher ranks, the army authorities have failed to initiate appropriate action against them. the court after recording this contention and perusing the relevant facts and status reports found that before any effective order could be passed it would be appropriate for the ministry of defence to file an affidavit setting out the latest position including the details of any orders of disciplinary action/punishment which may have been passed against the officers/army personnel. the court further directed that the affidavit should specifically mention about the status of action taken against the officers named in the enquiry report dated 15th july, 2007. the state of rajasthan was also directed to submit latest status report as to the progress made in various criminal/disciplinary proceedings including against any i.a.s. officers. accordingly, additional affidavit of director, ministry of defence has been filed (at pages 500-512) giving relevant information about the action taken against the army personnel and status of those proceedings including the status of pending proceedings. along with the affidavit, specific information regarding the action taken against the concerned army personnel including by way of disciplinary action has been placed on record in the form of a chart annexed as appendix-a. appendix-a mentions about the action taken against 25 officers involved in importing ammunition in excess of authorization. after enquiry, the competent authority has awarded severe displeasure (non-recordable) by general officer-in-command, south western command. in another chart annexed to the affidavit as appendix-b, summary of administrative action initiated against twelve officers who retrieved and deposited weapons is mentioned. some of them have been awarded severe displeasure (recordable) and in some cases non-recordable. chart annexed as appendix-c to the affidavit gives summary of disciplinary action initiated against another twenty five army personnel who were involved in sale of a single weapon. punishment of severe reprimand/reprimand with fine has been awarded in some cases and in other cases forfeiture of one year service for the purpose of promotion has been awarded. in chart appendix-d, details of 10 cases of retired officers is mentioned. their proposals are referred to civil administration and were being processed. similarly, the chief secretary of the state of rajasthan filed further affidavit dated 19th july, 2013 (at pages 513-538), giving latest status of criminal proceedings/disciplinary proceedings.4. in the context of punishment awarded to the army personnel the petitioner contends that the department has taken a lenient approach. according to him, the punishment ought to have been more severe. the argument though attractive at the first blush on a deeper scrutiny does not commend to us. for, the appropriate authority has taken into account all the attending circumstances before awarding punishment to the concerned army personnel. had it been a case of all the army officials being awarded same punishment or absolved and exonerated, that may have necessitated further probe by us. merely because some other punishment could also be awarded, by itself, can be no ground to continue with the probe in this public interest petition. we find that suitable action has been taken against the erring army personnel. further, as there is no material before us to even remotely suggest that the punishment awarded against any particular army personnel is to favour him in any manner, nothing more is required to be done.5. indeed, the issue raised by the petitioner has resulted in unraveling of the irregularities and illegalities committed by the concerned officers. that, however, has now been redressed by the appropriate authority by taking suitable action against the erring army personnel. the affidavits filed from time to time by the appropriate authority also revealed that criminal action is instituted against the erring persons, which, in most cases, has been taken to its logical end and some are pending trial. as regards the pending cases, we have no doubt that the appropriate authority/court will take the same to its logical end expeditiously in accordance with law.6. reverting to the response filed by the state of rajasthan, chief secretary in his affidavit sworn on 8th march, 2011, it is stated that the state government has investigated the matter in right earnest and also accorded sanction against the concerned government officials. four members of the rajasthan administrative services (ras) were suspended and sanction to prosecute them was also granted. details of criminal cases have been noted in this affidavit. this affidavit has also placed on record that there are other 304 suspected licences and those cases were under scrutiny. assurance was given in this affidavit that the scrutiny in that behalf will be done within six months time. in the subsequent affidavit filed by the state of rajasthan sworn on 2nd august, 2011, the progress about the criminal cases has been revealed. this affidavit mentions that only one criminal case was pending for investigation and in one case prosecution sanction was awaited. further affidavit of the chief secretary of government of rajasthan sworn on 19th july, 2013, was filed to place on record the latest status report about the charge sheet filed in various criminal cases. it also mentions about the status of disciplinary proceedings initiated against two officers of the state. from the affidavits filed from time to time, it is noticed that suitable action has been taken against all persons found involved during the enquiry, by way of criminal proceedings or disciplinary proceedings, as the case may be. with regard to action taken by the state government no specific grievance has been made by the petitioner about its inadequacy or inertia in the progress of disciplinary proceedings. a general submission is made that the response filed by the state government is a total eye wash. at the same time, no material is brought to our notice which would suggest that the criminal cases instituted by the state against its erring officers was insufficient measure or that the state has failed to take action against any particular person or government officer who was found to be involved as per the enquiry report. as regards the criminal cases, the progress of those cases has been placed on record. as observed in the case of action taken by the ministry of defence, we may reiterate that the appropriate authority/court will take the proceedings pending before it to its logical end expeditiously in accordance with law.7. as regards the prayer to issue direction to the home ministry to frame guidelines in the matter of issuing arms licenses, it is stated that the licensing authority in respect of prohibited bore weapons is with the central government. the ministry of home affairs processes the applications strictly as per the provisions of the arms act, 1959 and the rules framed thereunder. whereas, the district magistrate is the licensing authority for non prohibited bore weapons. as per the extant regulations, the licensing authority is obliged to seek report of the officer in-charge of the nearest police station to verify the antecedents of the applicant; and only those who fulfill the prescribed norms are granted license. while processing the applications, the district magistrate is also obliged to consider such report and grant arms license for non prohibited weapons only to persons who may be residing within the local limits of the district magistrate including after due verification of antecedents of the applicant.8. considering the reports and the affidavits filed by the respective authorities from time to time in the present proceedings and being satisfied that suitable action has been taken by the appropriate authority of the state government as well as central government against officers whose involvement has been noted in the independent enquiries made by the concerned department; and that as there is already a firm procedure prescribed for issuance of prohibited and non prohibited weapons in the shape of provisions of the arms act and the rules framed thereunder and including the periodical instructions issued by the department in that behalf, nothing more needs to be done.9. accordingly, we deem it appropriate to dispose of this petition with observation that the appropriate authorities/court must dispose of the pending matter(s) if any, expeditiously in accordance with law.10. we place on record our appreciation for the initiative taken by the petitioner in filing this petition and bringing to the fore such a sensitive issue, which otherwise may have gone unnoticed.11. while parting, we reiterate the sentiment expressed in the orders passed by this court from time to time to ensure that the mechanism for sale of nsp weapons must be under strict scrutiny and supervision of the competent authority in accord with the provisions of the arms act and the rules framed thereunder including the defence services regulations without any exception.12. with the above observations, we dispose of this petition with costs. we direct the union of india to pay cost quantified at rs. 10,000/-, to the petitioner. as the petition is disposed in terms of this order, the original record kept in sealed cover be returned back to the counsel for the concerned respondent.
1. leave granted. this appeal has been preferred by appellant against the order dated 27th june, 2013 in cwp no. 1553/2013 passed by the high court of h.p. at shimla.2. the only question that arises for determination is whether the appellants are entitled for regular appointment in view of the fact that they were appointed after following all procedure of selection including recommendation of the public service commission and are continuing in service since long.3. the factual matrix of the case is as follows:in exercise of power conferred under section 79(c) read with section 15 of the electricity (supply) act, 1948, the h.p. state electricity board (hereinafter referred to as 'electricity board') by notification dated 1st november, 2006, repealed the 1975 'recruitment and promotion regulations for the post of assistant accounts officer class-i (gazetted)' and framed new regulations known as 'the h.p. electricity board recruitment and promotion regulations for the post of assistant accounts officer, 2006'. the said regulation prescribes the total number of posts, scale of pay, the percentage of posts to be filled up by direct recruitment/contract/by promotion, qualification etc. relevant portion of the 2006 regulation reads as follows:4. after publication of regulation 2006, the electricity board decided to fill up the posts of assistant accounts officer through h.p. public service commission. by letter dated 14th march, 2007, the electricity board requested the principal secretary (power), government of himachal pradesh to take steps to fill up 14 posts by direct recruitment on regular basis and to send requisition to the public service commission. the letter dated 14th march, 2007 reads as follows:"himachal pradesh stateelectricity boarddated: 14.3.07no. hpseb(sectt)/102-13/07-124431-32tothe pr. secretary (power)to the govt. of h.p. shimla-2.subject:- recruitment of assistant accounts officers on regular basis.sir,i am directed to say that as per r & p regulations notified by the board vide dated 1.11.2006, for filling up the posts of assistant accounts officers, a provision has been made to fill up 30% post by method of direct recruitment and 70% posts by method of promotion from amongst the superintendent (divisional accounts) who passes sas part-ii examination. the entire cadre posts of assistant accounts officers in the board are 46 posts out of which 32 posts are to be filled by promotion and 14 posts are to be filled in by direct recruitment. since the officers in feeder grade could not qualify the sas part-ii examination and as also to induct professionally qualified persons with qualification like charted accountant, mb (finance etc.) in the cadre, the provision for filling up 30% posts of assistant accounts officers by direct recruitment has been made.at present, all the 14 posts meant for direct recruitment are lying vacant and the work in various units is suffering. the matter was informally discussed in full board meeting held on 16.10.2006 and the consensus was that requisition may be sent to hppsc.the prescribed form-23 i.e. requisition for the recruitment of candidates for appointment to the post of assistant accounts officers duly filled in is sent herewith in triplicate for furnishing the same top h.p. public service commission. the copy of the r & p regulations of assistant accounts officers is also enclosed herewith.you are therefore, requested to kindly allow filling up these post and send requisition to h.p. public service commission to process the case for recruitment of assistant accounts officers to till up the above posts on regular basis.yours faithfully, sd/-secretaryh.p. state electricity board vidyut bhavan, shimla-4."5. in the form 23, attached with aforesaid requisition for recruitment of candidates to the posts of assistant accounts officer on regular basis, scale of pay, the number of posts etc. were shown, relevant portion of which reads as follows:"requisition for the recruitment of candidates for appointment to the post(s) of assistant accounts officer on regular basisfrom the aforesaid requisition, it is clear that 14 regular posts of assistant accounts officers were requisitioned to be filled up in the regular pay scale of ` 7750-13,300 with clear stipulation that the selected candidates will be on probation for a period for 2 years subject to such further extension for a period not exceeding one year as may be ordered in special circumstances for reasons to be recording in writing.6. however, when the himachal pradesh public service commission issued advertisement no. ix/2007 on 13th november, 2007 inviting applications to the post of assistant accounts officer class-i, for the reasons not disclosed by respondents the scale of pay was shown 50% of the regular pay and the nature of appointment on contract basis as apparent from clause (c) of the advertisement which reads as follows:"(c) department of m.p.p. & power, h.p.7. pursuant to the said advertisement, appellants applied for the post of assistant accounts officer class-i and after written test and interview and on being selected, their names were recommended by the himachal pradesh public service commission and intimated through press note. therein it was mentioned that their appointment to the post of assistant accounts officer will be on contract basis. the said press note reads as follows:"himachal pradesh public servicecommissionpress notehimachal pradesh public service commission has declared the result of the interviews held from 24th to 28th february, 2009 and 2nd to 6th march, 2009 for recruitment to the post(s) of assistant accounts officers (on contract basis) in the department of mpp and power, h.p. the names of following candidates are being recommended to the government for appointment:-the result is also available on commission's website at www.himachal.nic.in/hppsc.sd/-under secretaryh.p. public service commission'sshimla-171002"8. thereafter the secretary of the himachal pradesh electricity board by letter dated 2nd july, 2009 forwarded the names of appellants to the chief medical officer, deen dayal upadhyaya hospital, district hospital, shimla (h.p.) with a request to constitute a medical board to conduct medical examination of the appellants and other recommended candidates. having found fit, the appellants were appointed in the year 2009 to the post of assistant accounts officer (class i) but on contract basis.9. having found fit and in absence of any allegation against them, their period of contract was extended from time to time and now they have completed more than 5 years of service.10. learned counsel appearing for the appellants contended that all procedure for regular appointment having been complied with including recommendation by the public service commission, there was no occasion for the respondents to employ them on contract basis and there should not be any difficulty to provide them regular appointment.11. learned counsel for the respondent opposed the prayer on the ground that their appointment were made in terms of regulation 2006 on contract basis and there is no provision for regularization of service.12. we have considered the rival contention, perused the record and the regulations framed by the government.13. from the facts as noticed above, we find that the electricity board was in need of regular assistant account officers class i and their being 14 posts vacant, they made requisition to fill up all the 14 posts on regular basis. respondents have failed to disclose the circumstances in which the advertisement was published by the public service commission, the scale of pay was shown @ 50% of the regular pay and the nature of appointment on contract basis.14. in fact in the said advertisement for the post of assistant accounts officer class-i, the posts reserved for different categories were shown i.e. gen.-09, sc-01, st-01, obc-01, ex-servicemen gen.-01, disabled person (low vision)-01 (total-14 posts). thus, we find even the rule of reservation was also followed.15. the action on the part of the respondents/state authorities including the public service commission prescribing 50% of the regular pay of ` 7750 + dp on contract basis initially for one year, extendable on year to year basis is against the requisition and the decision taken by electricity board. such action on the part of the authorities not only amounts to unfair employment practice but also arbitrary and violative of article 14 of the constitution of india.16. it is clear that the terms of conditions of payment at the rate of 50% of regular pay and nature of appointment on contract basis was inserted in the advertisement by the state authorities and the h.p. public service commission at later stage just to deprive the candidates from their regular pay and their right to continue in the service. the high court failed to noticed the aforesaid fact and erred in holding that the regularization of service is not permissible. in fact it was not a case of regularisation of service of the appellants but is a case wherein direction ought to have been issued on the respondents to provide the appellants with orders of regular appointment from the date of their initial appointment and to treat the initial period of two years as probation and to provide them with other consequential benefits.17. for the reasons aforesaid, we set aside the impugned judgment dated 27th june, 2013 passed by the high court of himachal pradesh at shimla in cwp no. 1553 of 2013-f and direct the respondents to provide letter of regular appointment to the appellants w.e.f. the date of their initial appointment treating the initial two years as on probation with further direction to provide the appellants with consequential benefits including regular scale of pay, increment, arrears of pay, seniority etc. to which they are entitled under the law. the formal orders in compliance with this court's order to be issued within two months and consequential benefits should be paid within three months. the appeal is allowed with aforesaid observations and directions, no costs.
civil appeal no(s). 5886 of 2005:1. heard learned counsel for the parties. learned senior counsel for the respondent rightly points out that the pre-conditions for availing the import duty exemption were not fulfilled by the appellant. we do not find any error in the impugned final judgment and order passed by the cestat [2005 (180) e.l.t. 223 (tribunal)]. the appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.civil appeal no(s). 5988 of 2010none appears.2. the appeal is dismissed in default for non-appearance.
s.b. sinha, j.1. questions of some importance arise for consideration in this application filed by the respondent-herein under sections 30 and 33 of the arbitration act, 1940 questioning an award dated 29.4.2002 passed by three learned arbitrators appointed by this court.background facts:2. army welfare housing organization (for short 'awho') and sumangal services pvt. ltd. (for short 'sumangal') entered into an agreement for development of land and construction of a composite housing project on a turn-key basis on approximately 17.9 acres of land situate on the vip road, in the town of kolkata. for the said purpose a draft agreement initially drawn up was given finality by articles of agreement dated 23. 8.1993. certain terms and conditions, however, had been altered therein with mutual consent.3. the project was envisaged to be completed in three phases. considerable progress was made in the matter of construction of work in phase i. the plots where the said work was being carried out fell under the local administration of gopalpur arjunpur gram panchayat. the building plan for phase i was sanctioned by the said gram panchayat in september, 1991 in terms whereof 11 blocks of houses could be constructed. the said area, however, became a municipality in terms of the west bengal municipal act, 1932 known as rajarhat gopalpur municipality. west bengal municipality act, 1932, however, was repealed and replaced by west bengal municipal act, 1993.4. it is not in dispute that pursuant to or in furtherance of the said agreement sumangal entered into negotiations with the owners of the agricultural lands for sale thereof where for sale deeds in respect of 2.32 acres of land were executed by the owners in favour of awho. sumangal received the amount for consideration from awho paid to the owners upon furnishing a bank guarantee as also subject to the condition that it will get the said land converted into bastu.5. lands measuring about 13 acres had already been converted into bastu. on or about 8.12.1934, an application was made by awho for modifications or revisions in the master plan where for a revised master plan was submitted for approval of the municipality stating:"tel : 3010820army welfare housing organisationsouth hutments,kashmir house,rajaji marg,new delhi-110011b/03020/cal-ii/awho8 dec 94the chairman,rajarhat gopalpur municipality raghnunathpur,calcutta-700059submission and final approval of plan from municipal authoritydear sir,1. this is to bring to your kind notice that our organization has undertaken the construction of "own your own house" housing project for the benefit of our defence personnel at no profit no loss basis. we have engaged m/s dulal mukherjee & associates as consulting architect for the project.2. as per demand/requirements for the housing for army personnel, our architect made a master plan of the project and also plans for 04 types of dwelling units (05 storyed) which were approved by the gram panchayat vide sanction no. 181/91 dated 13 sep. 91.3. in this connection we would like to mention that due to site constraints and also to meet the demand for housing among army personnel, minor modifications/revisions have been made to the master plan and also to the individual dwelling units which were sanctioned earlier.4. we are submitting herewith the revised master plan and also individual plan for dwelling units (additions and alterations) for your approval. we therefore make an appeal to your goodself to kindly give special consideration to our plan and approve the same at the earliest.yours faithfully,(raghu nandan)brig (retd)dt & dy mdfor managing director"6. such permission was granted only on 9.3.1995.7. according to sumangal, despite the fact that no building plan was filed or sanctioned for phase ii and phase iii but as per instruction of awho it proceeded with the construction of phase ii, such an application was filed for the first time on 13.5.1995. it stands admitted that the proposed height of the towers was more than the permissible one.8. the municipal authorities vide its letter dated 23.5.1995 directed stoppage of work in six/seven blocks where allegedly unauthorized construction was being carried out stating:"we came to learn that some a blocks of 5 storied buildings were approved by erstwhile panchayat before the origination of the above municipality. after the birth on 13.01.94 as per norms of w.b.m. act '93 and calcutta gazette, new plans if any, or construction job if any, has to be approved of by this municipal authority.we learnt some additional 6/7 blocks are being constructed at your vip project for which no plan was submitted to the engineering division of this office for approval. this is a gross violation of w.b.m. act '93 and '79 t & c development-planning act.it is further learnt that the 7/8 blocks constructed by you on the basis of the plan sanctioned by erstwhile panchayat has also been severely deviated from actuality - which is also punishable under the law.we strongly believe that an esteemed organization like you, will not indulge in such illegal activities and refrain from all such unapproved/unauthorized works."9. sumangal thereafter sought advice of awho by a letter dated 24th may, 1995 pointing out therein that if any construction activity is carried out despite objections of local authority, persons involved would be liable for punishment both under criminal as well as civil law. it reiterated the said stand by a letter dated 25th may, 1995 drawing awho's attention to the provisions of sections 204. 214 and 440 of the west bengal municipal act, 1993 and requesting it for its response also to its earlier letter dated 24th may, 1995. sumangal did not receive any reply thereto and hence by its letter dated 27th may, 1995 stated:"if clear out instructions are not received from you by 29th may, we shall be compelled to demobilize. please advise urgently. we shall be constrained to consider your silence as your agreement to our demobilization."10. the engineers of municipality visited the project site a number of times but the sanctioned plan had allegedly not been produced. in the aforementioned situation, the chairman of the municipality issued a letter to the project manager, awho on 21.7.1995 stating:"dear sir,our engineers have visited your project site number of times and discussed with your engineers about the drawing, design and other infrastructures projects placed before them. the undersigned also took the opportunity to meet with you and talk to your m/s dulal mukherjee a associates where we have inter changed our views and the norms of municipal rules & regulations.our engineer has been asking you for the erstwhile panchayat recommended plan by which you have constructed already 8-9 blocks. all the time he has come back without result.you would appreciate that without a plan already approved by erstwhile panchayat, we can not check/judge the present position or the viability of your project. hence the question of your infrastructural development like construction of road, drains etc. does not arise at all at the moment.we would request you fervently to submit the panchayat recommended plan on the basis of which we will proceed further.thanking you"(emphasis supplied)11. in the meantime the architect and the project engineer of awho met the chairman of the municipality and it was allegedly agreed that the work need not be stopped in the buildings for which the plans have already been approved. sumangal, therefore, was advised not to stop the work for which plans have already been approved. (see letter of awho to sumangal dated 27.5.1995).12. awho by their letters dated 25th july, 1995 and 11th august, 1995 advised sumangal to reorganize and recommence its work by employing sufficient strength of labour and bringing the required material to site by 11th september, 1995 to ensure that the progress of the work is substantially increased. it was threatened that if suitable action is not taken in this behalf by sumangal awho may be compelled to take action under clause 129(e) of the contract.13. it appears that sumangal replied thereto by its letter dated 14th august, 1995. in its response to the said letter dated 14th august, 1995. awho drew the attention of sumangal to the fact that there are certain types of work which would not come within the purview of the stop work notice by the municipality and as such the same could have been carried out. it was stated:"...you are again advised to reorganise your work by employing sufficient labour and bringing in the required material to ensure that the progress of the work is substantially increased by 15 sep 95 failing which awho may be compelled to take action under clause 129 (e) on page 176 of contract agreement. this is without prejudice to any other right or remedy which shall have accrued or shall accrue to the organisation."14. some correspondences thereafter passed between the parties and by its letter dated 10th october, 1995 awho ultimately cancelled the contract with effect from 17th october, 1995.15. a civil suit was filed by sumangal before the 1st assistant district judge at barasat being suit no. 867 of 1995 praying for a declaration that the contract was void. certain consequential reliefs were also prayed therein in relation to the said termination of contract.16. an application purported to be under section 20 of the arbitration act, 1940 was filed by the awho before the delhi high court which was marked as suit no. 2442 of 1995 for appointment of an arbitrator in terms of the arbitration agreement contained in clause 136 of the general terms and conditions of the contract.17. in the said civil suit sumangal prayed for an order of injunction which was refused where against an appeal was preferred in the high court of calcutta and by reason of an interim order dated 28.3.1996 the parties were directed to maintain status quo. a slp was filed by awho against the said order.18. this court in the said s.l.p., however, without going into the correctness or otherwise of the interim order dated 28.3.1996 of the high court passed the following order:"leave granted.this appeal calls in question the order of the high court of calcutta dated 28.3.1996.in view of the developments which have taken place in this court, it is not necessary to refer to the detailed facts of the case. admittedly, disputes and differences have arisen between the parties and those are pending adjudication in the court of the first assistant district judge, barasat (title suit no. 367 of 1995) and in the high court of delhi (suit no. 2442 of 1935). it is agreed to by learned counsel for the parties that those disputes and differences be referred for adjudication to an arbitrator. with consent of the parties, we refer the disputes arising out of the two suits noticed above to shri h.r. khanna, former judge of this court, who shall enter upon the reference and make his award within the statutory period. the learned arbitrator shall fix his own fee and the manner of its payment. the parties shall be at liberty to file their claims/counter-claim before the arbitrator.with the reference of the disputes and differences between the parties to the learned arbitrator, the two suits pending at barasat and in the delhi high court shall stand withdrawn from the respective courts where those are pending. copy of this order shall be sent to the concerned courts for due compliance.the learned arbitrator shall file the award in this court. it is directed that no other court shall interdict the arbitration proceedings.the appeal is disposed of accordingly. no costs."19. even before filing the statements of claims and counter-claims; the parties jointly requested the learned arbitrator to pass an interim award as regard the ownership of the lands as to whether awho by reason of the purported deeds of sale became the absolute owner of the property comprising 14.17 acres of land where for the following issues were raised by sumangal :"a) whether or not awho/party no. 2 is the absolute owner of the suit property comprising of 14.17 acres of land vide registered sale deeds, mutation and conversion certificates issued by the competent authority, in favour of the petitioner including the properties built thereon and that the land so acquired absolutely and for ever by the party no. 2/awho and the property built thereon is not a returnable security, which property pursuant to the cancellation of contract is neither refundable nor can be same be reconveyed to party no. 1 and/or land sellers?b) whether, party no. 2 and/or party no. 1 and/or the land sellers have a first and paramount charge on the said land sold/transferred to the party no. 2 absolutely and forever, particulars whereof are given the annexures (colly), annexed hereto, and that whether after sale of the said plots of land by the land sellers, to the party no. 2 vide registered sale deed based upon an understanding as spelled out in the developer's agreement and power of attorney and affidavits etc. executed by and between the land seller and party no. 1, which as is alleged by party no. 1 have since become void and inoperative, and therefore, is the party no. 1 entitled for the payment of a sum of rs. 38 lakhs 47 thousand as pleaded in paragraph 56 of its title suit no. 867 of 1935?c) whether the party no. 1 has a first and paramount charge on the construction, buildings and all other materials that are lying at and within the land transferred/sold by the land sellers, through party no. 1 to the party no. 2 for it's claim on the basis of item rate contract as alleged claimed for the alleged loss and damages suffered by the party no. 1 as stated in it's title suit no. 878 of 1995?d) whether in alternative a decree for specific performance of the agreement referred to in paragraph 69 of the aforesaid title suit above and reconveyance of the lands mentioned in schedule g to the suit in favour of the party no. 1 or the land seller can be decreed either in favour of the party no. 1 and/the land sellers who had sold absolutely and for ever their plots of land vide registered sale deeds which were subsequently mutated and its land use changed from agricultural to residential by the competent authority under the west bengal land reform act in favour of the party no. 2, but are now claiming that the deed of sale was in reality a document or security?e) whether or not the keys of the godown at contract site which the party no. 1 is illegally holding in it's custody be given back to party no. 2 to utilize the stores contained therein before commencing the work.f) any other relief in the circumstances of the case may also be passed/awarded."20. the learned arbitrator, however, was not inclined to accede to the said request. thereafter, an application was filed by awho before the learned arbitrator to the effect that it may be allowed to commence and complete uninterrupted construction work as well as development of the housing project at the risk of sumangal. sumangal filed a reply to the said application.21. an order was passed on the said application of awho by the learned arbitrator on 1.11.1997 subject to the following conditions:(a) the question as to whether such an order can be passed at the risk of sumangal can be raised only at the time of final award.(b) the development work may be confined to 14.17 acres of land which was the subject matter of sale and which it was stated had been demarcated at the site.(c) all those works could be subject to the ultimate decision of the case.(d) awho shall not give final possession of any of those flats or part of the land to any one including the person described as allottees.(e) the said order was without prejudice to any of the contentions which may be raised by the parties.(f) constructions and development work would be of the same kind and specifications as were provided in the contract at competitive rates through an established contractor after inviting tenders therefore.22. it was further stated therein :"it is agreed by both the parties that the contract produce for the construction of 16 towers and such 16 towers already exist on the site. if any new tower is constructed by party no. 2 or its contractor, party no. 1 would not be liable for it."23. a review application was filed before the arbitrator by sumangal wherein several questions including the power of arbitrator to pass an interim order of injunction were raised but the same was rejected stating:"it has been vehemently argued that the arbitrator has no power to make the kind of interlocutory order made on november 1, 1997. in this respect learned counsel for party no. 1 has also emphasized that effected the once the prayer for interim award has not been granted, the order dated november 1, 1997 which was in the nature of an interim award was unwarranted. i find myself unable to accede to this contention. so far as that order is concerned, it was made expressly clear that the said order would be without prejudice to any of the contentions which might be raised by the parties. it was also added that all the works which party no. 2 is being allowed to do would be subject to the ultimate decision of the case, the order thus makes it clear that there was no finality attached to that order and that it would be subjected to the ultimate decision of the case. as such the order cannot be deemed to be an interim award.coming to the other contention that the arbitrator has no power to make an interlocutory order dated november 1, 1997. i find that the work of measurements has been smoothly carried out and the results of measurements have been accepted by both the parties. as the proceedings of arbitration would take considerable time before the final award is given, to expedite the execution of the remaining unfinished work, party no. 2 was allowed to commence and complete the unfinished work which was the subject matter of the contract between the parties. in my opinion the order made on november 1, 1997 was in the interest of justice and not to let the remaining work reaming unfinished till the time of the final award. as the order was made ex debito justitiae it call for no review or modification. in any case, it has been made clear that this order would be subject to the final decision of the case and without prejudice to any of the rights of the parties.another point made in the application of party no. 1 is that it was working as stated in the order of november 1, 1997 that 16 blocks/buildings existed at site have gone through the order dated november 1, 1997, and no where it is stated therein that 16 blocks/buildings exist at the site.i, therefore, find no ground to review/modify the order dated november 1. 1997. the application accordingly stands disposed of".24. the learned arbitrator, therefore, did not determine the question as to whether he had jurisdiction to pass an interim order or not.25. no award was not passed by the arbitrator for a long time although several extensions had been granted. on or about 26.2.2000 an application for revocation of the authority of the arbitrator was filed by sumangal and by an order dated 11.5.2000 this court constituted a board of three arbitrators instead and place of the sole arbitrator.26. the award was filed before this court on 23.4.2002 by the learned arbitrators where against sumangal filed an application on or about 8th july, 2002 under sections 30 and 33 of the act.award:27. before the arbitrators both the parties filed their respective claims. claim no. 1 of awho related to the title, ownership and possession of 14.17 acres of land. claim no. 2 of awho related to cost of completion of balance work at the risk and expense of sumangal. both the claims were allowed by the learned arbitrators.28. claim no. 3 related to compensation for delay in performance of the contract by sumangal, whereas claim no. 4 related to damages for non-completion of work resulting in loss of rentals to allottees of awho. claim no. 5 related to reimbursement of payments made by awho towards the premium on sumangal's all risk insurance policy. claim no. 6 related to damages for delay in transfer of land. all these claims were disallowed.29. the claim on interest contained in claim no. 7 and claim of costs of arbitration in claim no. 8 were also allowed.30. the claim of sumangal relating to title of 14.17 acres of land and claim for an amount of rs. 11,40,85,000/-, being an alternative claim was disallowed.31. the learned arbitrators in making the award formulated as many as 29 issues which have been answered in the following terms:"issue no. 1since we have found that sspl had failed to discharge their obligation in terms of the agreement dated august 27, 1993, the issue is decided against sspl and in favour of awho.issue no. 2since we have found that awho were entitled to terminate the said contract and to get the balance work executed at the expense and risk of sspl, the issue is decided in favour of awho and against sspl.issue no. 3since we have found that awho are the full owner and in possession of 14.17 acres of land in dispute and the property built thereon, the issue is decided in favour of awho and against sspl.issues nos. 4 & 5since we are of the view that the sale deeds executed in favour of awho cannot be regarded as documents by way of security for the advance taken by sspl from awho and that no charge was created on the lands indispute, the issues are decided in favour of awho and against sspl.issue no. 6since we have held that the claims made by awho fall within the ambit of the scope of reference as laid down in the order of the hon'ble supreme court, the issue is decided in favour of awho and against sspl.issues nos. 7 & 8no submission was made on behalf of sspl with regard to these issues. the issues are decided against sspl and in favour of awho.issues nos. 9 & 10since we have found that as per the agreement between awho and dma, the architect was to provide drawings and specifications of the proposed flats and external services and it was the duty of sspl to take follow up action in the matter of obtaining sanction from the statutory bodies and it was not the responsibility of the architect to obtain sanction from the statutory bodies including the municipality, the issues are decided against sspl and in favour of awho.issues nos. 11 & 12since we have found that the agreement dated august 27, 1993 and the preceding letter of intent dated january 4, 1991 and the draft agreement dated december 26, 1331 cannot be said to have become impossible of performance and cannot be regarded to have become void on the ground of frustration, the issues are decided against sspl and in favour of awho.issue no. 13it has been found that the construction in respect of the units in phase i was started after obtaining the sanction for the plans from the gram panchayat and though there were some deviations and alterations from the sanctioned plan but the same could be regularized. as regards the units which were to be constructed in phase ii it has been found that the said construction was made without obtaining the sanction for the plans from the competent authority but the plans had been submitted for approval during the course of construction and the said plans were subsequently approved on april 23, 1997 and the plans for the whole project were also revalidated. this issue is decided accordingly.issue no. 14we have found that the deviations and the alterations in respect of construction in phase i were not very material in nature and could be regularized and were in fact regularized when the revised plans were sanctioned and revalidated by the municipality. this issue is decided accordingly.issue no. 15we have found that payments for the rars for the construction work upto august 1992 were not made since sspl failed to abide by their commitment to transfer the balance land by february 15, 1992 and subsequently on the transfer of the balance land in august 1993 and after execution of the agreement dated august 27, 1993, the payments for the said work were made. this issue is decided accordingly.issue no. 16we have found that ssfl never raised any objection regarding construction in respect of works in phase ii on the ground that there were no sanctioned plans for the same and sspl obtained benefit in the matter of release of payments on the basis of the order placed for such construction. this issue is decided against sspl and in favour of awho.issue no. 17it has been found that the municipality stopped construction work in phase ii but subsequently the plans for phase ii were approved by the municipality on april 23, 1997. the issue is decided accordingly.issue no. 18we have found that awho issued the working drawings for the project to sspl and the delay in issuing some of the drawings was not very material. the issue is decided accordingly.issue no. 19no submissions were made by sspl in support of this issue. the issue is accordingly decided against sspl and in favour of awho.issues nos. 20 & 22the alterations in the lay out of the built up area of phase i buildings were made by awho in the full knowledge of sspl and the said alterations were not material because they were subsequently revalidated by the municipality in sanctioning the revised plans. the issues are accordingly decided against sspl and in favour of awho.issue no. 21there was no change in the height of the buildings in respect of phase i inasmuch as the height of the blocks in phase i were not above the heights as per the sanctioned plans. the heights of the blocks constructed in phase ii for which plans had not been approved were in excess of the height limitations prescribed in the buildings regulations. no. objection certificate has been granted by the airport authorities of india ltd. and it was open to the state government to relax the height limitation. the issue is accordingly decided against sspl and in favour of awho.issues no. 23we have found that the title to the lands, transferred in favour of awho under the various sale deeds passed in favour of awho independent of the turnkey project and failure of the turnkey project did not have any bearing on the transfer of title. the issue is accordingly decided in favour of awho and against sspl.issue no. 24no submissions were made by sspl with regard to this issue and the issue is decided against sspl.issue no. 25we have found that awho are entitled to compensation under claim no. 2 towards cost of completion of the balance work at the risk and expense of sspl since sspl failed to perform their part of the obligation under the contract. the issue is decided in favour of awho and against sspl.issue no. 26we have found that the title, ownership and possession of 14.17 acres of land which was transferred in favour of awho under the various sale deeds vests exclusively with awho and claim no. 1 made by awho has, therefore, been allowed. the issue is decided in favour of awho accordingly.issue no. 27we have found that sspl are not entitled to reversion of land. the issue is accordingly decided against sspl.issue no. 28we have found that sspl are not entitled to recover any amount from awho. the issue is therefore decided against sspl.issue no. 29since we have found issue no. 28 against sspl and found that sspl are not entitled to recover any amount from awho, therefore, the question of their entitlement to recover interest from awho does not arise. the said issue is decided against sspl."32. in terms of the aforementioned findings, the learned arbitrators awarded:"we make the award in the following terms:1. the claim of sspl that land admeasuring 14.17 acres and structures thereon comprising of the 14 blocks/buildings or any other construction that maybe done by awho during the pendency of the arbitration proceedings, vests and is owned fully, exclusively and absolutely by sspl is disallowed.2. the alternative claim of sspl for an amount of rs. 11,40,85,000.00 is disallowed.3. claim no. 1 of awho in respect of title, ownership and possession of land admeasuring 14.17 acres of land located at mauza tighonia and koikhali, vip road, 24 parganas (north), calcutta transferred in their favour by various vendors/land owners is allowed.4. claim no. 2 of awho for cost of completion of balance work at the risk and expenses of sspl is allowed to the extent of rs. 6.97.00,000.00.5. claim no. 3 of awho is disallowed.6. claim no. 4 of awho is disallowed.7. claim no. 5 of awho is disallowed.8. claim no. 6 of awho is disallowed.9. claim no. 7 of awho is allowed to the extent that interest would be payable @ 12 per cent per annum on the amount of rs. 6,97,00,000.00 awarded under claim no. 2. interest shall be payable from the date of the award till payment is made.10. claim no. 8 of awho regarding costs is allowed to the extent that sspl will reimburse awho towards half share of the arbitrators' fee, administrative expenses and the other incidental expenses for the conduct of the arbitral proceedings. each party shall bear the costs and expenses incurred by it for prosecuting the arbitral proceedings."submissions:33. mr. k.n. bhat, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of sumangal would raise the following contentions:(i) a bare perusal of the award would show that the learned arbitrators ignored the terms of the agreement.(ii) in terms of clause 130 of the general conditions of contract, awho could maintain a claim as regard excess amount required for completion of the unfinished work only if the work was completed before a claim was raised or an estimate of the cost of completion is certified by the named architect. despite the fact that none of the aforementioned conditions were fulfilled, the award was made allegedly on the ground that clause 130 will have no application while the completion was permitted by an order passed in a judicial/ arbitral proceedings. mr. bhat would contend that the arbitrators being creature of the agreement were required to act within the four corners thereof and cannot by reason of an interim order override the basis of the agreement.(iii) clause 130 of the general conditions of contract would come into play only when the contract is validly terminated in terms of clause 123. the termination of contract by awho was on the ground that sumangal did not resume work in relation whereto the learned arbitrators failed to consider that the question of resumption of work by it did not arise as the municipality had banned further construction activities. furthermore, the arbitrators proceeded also on a wrong premise that sumangal failed to obtain sanction of building plans from the municipal authorities.(iv) as the plans were not sanctioned at the relevant time by statutory authorities; section 56 of the contract act was attracted having regard to the fact that it was commercially incapable of being performed upon passing of the ban order.(v) an award ignoring material and relevant documents would be rendered illegal and bad in law. as in the case the arbitrators ignored the letter dated 8th december, 1994 of awho for regularization of deviations and thus thereby they must be deemed to have admitted that deviations were done by them deliberately to suit their own convenience, and as such the arbitrators must be held to have misconducted themselves and the proceeding.(vi) furthermore, being a reasoned award, wrong application of law would vitiate the award.(vii) the award of the arbitrators is vitiated in law as an agreement purported to have been entered into by and between awho and the architect was enforced against sumangal although it was not a party thereto.(viii) the finding of the arbitrator that the frustration was a self-induced one is not based on any pleadings or materials on record. in any event collusion between sumangal and the municipal authorities was neither pleaded nor proved.(ix) in any view of the matter the learned arbitrator committed a legal misconduct insofar as they applied a wrong principle of law as regard determination of quantum of damages.34. in support of the aforementioned contentions, reliance has been placed by mr. bhat on steel authority of india ltd. v. j.c. budharaja, government and mining contractor manu/sc/0542/1999manu/sc/0542/1999 : air1999sc3275 , shyama charan agarwala & sons v. union of india [(2002) 6 scc 2011, mcgregor on damages, 16th edition, pages 1142 and 1143 and martens v. home freeholds co. ltd. and ors. [1921] all e.r. rep. 372.35. mr. arvind kumar tiwari, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, on the other hand, would submit that as the learned arbitrator passed an interim order with the consent of the parties, sumangal at a later stage cannot be permitted to take a different stand. in view of the interim order passed by one of the learned arbitrators, a notice inviting tender was issued whereafter contract was awarded to a third party and, thus, the bid made pursuant thereto could validly be made the basis of determination of quantum of damages. the plea of frustration of contract raised by sumangal has rightly been rejected by the learned arbitrators as the same was a self-induced one having regard to the fact that it itself got the ban orders issued by the municipal authorities. in any event sumangal in terms of the contract being liable for obtaining sanction of the building plans, must be held to have failed to perform its part of contract and consequentially has rightly been held liable for damages.findings:interim order passed by one of the arbitrators:36. a bare perusal of the order of the learned arbitrator dated 1st november, 1997 would clearly show that interim award was prayed for by the parties which would have granted substantial reliefs sought for by them in relation to the title in respect of 14.17 acres of land. it is admitted that the parties cooperated with each other in the matter of measurement of completed and uncompleted works in terms of the arbitrator's order dated 12th may, 1997 passed in the arbitration proceedings, the compliance whereof was recorded in minute of order dated 19th august, 1997.37. the learned arbitrator admittedly was not inclined to pass an interim award on the requests of the parties; whereafter only on or about 23rd october, 1997 an application was filed by awho stating:"that the development of the housing project is carried out by party no. 2 for it's allottees on no profit no loss basis which is self financed by the allottees of party no. 2. due to breach of contract committed by the party no. 1, allottees of party no. 2 have been denied shelter as well as their life time investments and are suffering for the want of shelters for themselves and their families. substantial time has already been lost due to non-performance of party no. 1 and any delay in commencement of the construction activity will cause immense financial misery and loss of further time (which cannot be given back by any one) to the allottees. in order to obviate the sufferings of hundreds of allottees who have invested their hard earned money. party no. 2 therefore prays to the hon'ble arbitrator to grant party no. 2 following relief.-"38. the prayer therein is as under:"in the premise, it is most respectfully prayed that in order to enable party no. 2 to commence early and unjustified completion of unfinished work as well as development of the housing project at the risk of the party no. 1 permission and liberty may be granted to party no. 2/applicant to forthwith take such steps to commence and complete the unfinished works including all such development work on 14.17 acres of land owned by party no. 2 at vip road, calcutta as may be fit and appropriate for the normal functioning of the housing project and peaceful and safe habitation of the allottees of the party no. 2/applicant.party no. 1. it's directors, officers, employees, agents and/or attorneys be also directed to hand over the keys of the stores, offices, and material lying at contract site which keys the party no. 1 is illegally holding in it's custody. the materials lying at site have already been paid for by party no. 2.party no. 1, it's directors, employees, agents and/or attorneys be directed not to interfere in any manner in the development and construction of the unfinished housing project by party no. 2 through such agencies as party no. 2 may deem fit and proper."39. sumangal filed a detailed reply thereto.40. sumangal further stated that the awho was not the owner of the property and the real object for such an application was to dispossess sumangal.41. it was further pointed out that such undertaking of the contract job by a third party would frustrate the present arbitration agreement as a result whereof further disputes may arise. it was contended:"10. the adjudication of this application without a full-fledged examination of the issues which have been raised by the parties in these proceedings would render the entire arbitration proceedings infructuous. it is further stated that after such directions as prayed for are given, the party no. 1 will be deprived of the fruits of any relief which it might obtain on final resolution of the disputes involved in this arbitration proceedings.11. the allegations contained in the petition are denied (except those which are admitted in records of proceedings). the purported cancellation or termination is wrongful. the question of completing the balance work/construction at the risk and cost of party no. 1 does not arise. the basis of the development of the housing project between party no. 2 and its allottees are not known and are neither admitted. it is denied that party no. 1 has committed any breach. the allegation relating to shelter and/or lifetime investments or suffering are not admitted and in any event, cannot override legal rights. it is denied that time has been lost due to alleged non-performance of party no. 1. since the party no. 1 is willing to return all moneys which are due to the party no. 2, the question of suffering financial misery of loss, cannot arise and the party no. 2 cannot put the blame on the party no. 1 in these facts and circumstances.12. the construction work commenced on 14 blocks only out of a total ordered 16 blocks over an area of 8.36 acres approximately. the said total area of 6.36 acres and the construction thereon belongs to the party no. 1 and the party no. 1 is entitled to deal with the same. the area of 7.81 acres over which no construction have been made also belongs to the party no. 1 and the party no. 1 is entitled to deal with the same."it is, therefore, not correct to contend that the said order was passed on consent of the parties. for all intent and purport. sumangal could not have consented to grant of such a prayer which would virtually put a final seal over the disputes. we have hereto- before quoted the purported order dated 1st september, 1397 which ex facie demonstrate that the arbitrator assumed jurisdiction to pass the said interim order at the behest of awho. furthermore, as noticed hereinbefore, sumangal filed a review application which was also dismissed in the manner noticed hereinbefore. the said interim order was, thus, not passed with consent of parties. if the learned arbitrator has no jurisdiction to pass an interim order, even by consent no such jurisdiction could be conferred. (see the united commercial bank ltd. v. their workmen , manu/sc/0067/1951manu/sc/0067/1951 : (1951)illj621sc and hakam singh v. gammon (india) ltd., manu/sc/0001/1971manu/sc/0001/1971 : [1971]3scr314 ).42. in hiscox v. outhwaite [1991] 2 lloyd's law reports 1, it is stated:"no act of the parties can create in the courts a jurisdiction which parliament has said shall vest, not in the courts, but exclusively in some other body. nor again can a party submit to, so as to make effective, a jurisdiction which does not exist: which is perhaps another way of saying the same thing. the argument we are here rejecting seems to be based on a confusion between two distinct kinds of jurisdiction: the supreme court may by statute, lack jurisdiction to deal with a particular matter - in this case matters including superannuation claims under section 8 but it has jurisdiction to decide whether or not it has jurisdiction to deal with such matters. by entering an unconditional appearance, a litigant submits to the second of these jurisdictions (which exists), but not to the first (which does not.)."43. an arbitrator in a situation of this nature had no jurisdiction to pass the interim order under the arbitration act, 1940 in absence of any specific agreement in relation thereto. the learned arbitrator by an interim order could not have placed the parties to a situation which would travel beyond the subject of disputes and differences referred to the arbitration. as no claim and counter-claim had been filed before the arbitrator, the arbitrator was not even aware of the nature of claims of the parties. he neither found any prima facie case nor balance of convenience for passing the said interim order, furthermore, an arbitrator is bound by the terms of reference.44. an arbitral tribunal is not a court of law. its orders are not judicial orders. its functions are not judicial functions. it cannot exercise its power ex debito justitiae. the jurisdiction of the arbitrator being confined to the four-corners of the agreement, he can only pass such an order which may be subject matter of reference.45. in morgan stanley mutual fund v. kartick das manu/sc/0553/1994manu/sc/0553/1994 : (1994)4scc225 the jurisdiction of the consumer disputes redressal forum to pass an order of injunction came up for consideration. this court having regard to the fact situation obtaining therein formulated the following questions:"(1) whether the prospective investor could be a 'consumer' within the meaning of consumer protection act, 1986 ?(2) whether the appellant company 'trades' in shares ?(3) does the consumer disputes redressal forum have jurisdiction in matters of this kind?(4) what are the guiding principles in relating to the grant of an ad interim injunction in such areas of the functioning of the capital market and public issues of the corporate sectors and whether certain 'venue restriction clauses' would require to be evolved judicially as has been done in cases such as state of w. b. v. swapan kumar guha and sanchaita investments manu/sc/0120/1982manu/sc/0120/1982 : 1982crilj819(5) what is the scope of section 14 of the act?"46. this court held that a prospective investor like the respondent therein is not a consumer. the question of the appellant-company trading in shares does not arise and in that view of the matter the consumer disputes redressal forum has no jurisdiction whatsoever to pass an order of interim injunction.47. having regard to section 14 of the consumer protection act, it was held:"44, a careful reading of the above discloses that there is no power under the act to grant any interim relief of (sic or) even an ad interim relief. only a final relief could be granted; if the jurisdiction of the forum to grant relief is confined to the four clauses mentioned under section 14, it passes our comprehension as to how an interim injunction could ever be granted disregarding even the balance of convenience."48. in absence of an agreement to the contrary, in terms of the provisions of arbitration act, 1940 an arbitrator can pass only an interim award or a final award. such awards are enforceable in law. the award of an arbitrator whether interim or final are capable of being made a rule of court, decree prepared and drawn up in terms thereof and put to execution.49. it is well-settled that for the purpose of obtaining an interim order a party to the arbitration proceeding during pendency of an arbitral proceeding can only approach a court of law in terms of section 41(b) of the arbitration act, 1940 and not otherwise. the said provision reads thus:"41. procedure and powers of court.-subject to the provisions of this act of rules made thereunder :x x x(b) the court shall have, for the purpose of, and in relation to arbitration proceedings, the same power of making orders in respect of any of the matters set out in the second schedule as it has for the purpose of and in relation to any proceedings before the court :provided that nothing in clause (b) shall be taken to prejudice any power which may be vested in an arbitrator or umpire for making orders with respect to any of such matters."50. in the instant case the proviso has no application as the arbitrator was not vested with such power.51. jurisdiction of courts in terms of section 41 of the act is enumerated in the second schedule, rules 1 and 4 whereof are as under:"1. the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which are the subject-matter of the reference.4. interim injunctions or the appointment of a receiver."52. even the court's jurisdiction under section 4(b) of the act is limited as it is confined to "for the purpose of and in relation to arbitration proceedings".53. courts, thus, have also no power to grant injunction ex debito justitiae.54. see union of india v. raman iron foundry manu/sc/0005/1974manu/sc/0005/1974 : [1974]3scr556 and h.m. kamaluddin ansari and co. v. union of india and ors. manu/sc/0002/1983manu/sc/0002/1983 : [1983]3scr607 .55. we may observe that even provision for stay in a suit under section 10 c.p.c. is not applicable in relation to an arbitration proceeding.56. in indrajit sinha v. b.l. rathi manu/wb/0064/1984manu/wb/0064/1984 : air1984cal281 , it is stated:"when section 32, arbitration act, completely prohibits a civil court from deciding the existence and validity of the arbitration agreement and section 41, arbitration act lays down that the civil procedure code will apply subject to the provisions and rules of the arbitration act, 1940, then section 10, c.p.c., cannot apply on the facts and circumstances of this case and the question of its applicability cannot arise.so far as court's inherent jurisdiction under section 151, c.p.c. is concerned, i do not think that on the facts and circumstances of this case inherent jurisdiction can be exercised to stay the pending application in view of the fact that the city civil court is incompetent to decide the issues pending before me in the application under section 33 of the act."57. in debendra nath singha and ors. v. dwijendra nath singha and ors. reported in manu/wb/0053/1970manu/wb/0053/1970 : air1970cal255 , the law is stated in the following terms :"on a proper construction of section 41 of the arbitration act and of section 41(b) in particular, i am of the opinion, that the court has the power and jurisdiction to appoint a receiver or to make any order of interim injunction or to make orders in respect of other matters set out in the second schedule in appropriate cases for the purpose of and in relation to arbitration proceedings: but this power and jurisdiction of the court cannot be exercised, if the exercise of any such power would prejudice any power which might be vested" in an arbitrator or umpire for making orders with respect to any of such matters. i am further of the opinion that in view of the provisions contained in section 41 of the arbitration act, the power and jurisdiction of the court to appoint a receiver or to make any order of interim injunction or any order in respect of the other matters set out in the second schedule are now governed, controlled and regulated by the said section, and apart from the power and jurisdiction conferred by the said section, the court has no power and jurisdiction independently of the provisions contained in the said section 41 to appoint a receiver, to make any order of interim injunction or any order in respect of the other matters set out in the second schedule."58. it is useful to notice that such a power has been expressly conferred on the arbitrator in terms of section 17 of the arbitration and conciliation act, 1996 which is as under:"17. interim measures ordered by arbitral tribunal.-(1.). unless "otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal may, at the request of a party order a party to take any interim measure of protection as the arbitral tribunal may consider necessary in respect of the subject-matter of the dispute.(2) the arbitral tribunal may require a party to provide appropriate security in connection with a measure ordered under sub-section (1)."59. a bare perusal of the aforementioned provisions would clearly show that even under section 17 of the 1996 act the power of the arbitrator is a limited one. it cannot issue any direction which would go beyond the reference or the arbitration agreement. furthermore, an award of the arbitrator under the 1996 act is not required to be made a rule of court; the same is enforceable on its own force. even under section 17 of 1996 act, an interim order must relate to the protection of subject matter of dispute and the order may be addressed only to a party to the arbitration. it cannot be addressed to other parties. even under section 17 of the 1996 act, no power is conferred upon the arbitral tribunal to enforce its order nor does it provide for judicial enforcement thereof. the said interim order of the learned arbitrator, therefore, being coram non judice was wholly without jurisdiction and thus, a nullity. (see kiran singh and ors. v. chaman paswan and ors. manu/sc/0116/1954manu/sc/0116/1954 : [1955]1scr117 , srimathi kaushalya devi and ors. v. shri k.l. bansal manu/sc/0308/1968manu/sc/0308/1968 : [1969]2scr1048 , union of india v. tarachand gupta and bros. manu/sc/0220/1971manu/sc/0220/1971 : 1983(13)elt1456(sc) , sushil kumar mehta v. gobind ram bohra (dead) through his lrs. manu/sc/0593/1989manu/sc/0593/1989 : (1990)1scc193 and smt. kanak and anr. v. u.p. avas evam vikas parishad and ors. manu/sc/0656/2003manu/sc/0656/2003 : air2003sc3894whether the award is vitiated as general conditions of contract had not seen complied with?60. before the learned arbitrators a question was raised as regard applicability of clauses 129(e) and 130 of the general conditions of contract which read as follows:"determination129. the organization may, without prejudice to any other right or remedy which shall have accrued or shall accrue thereafter to the organization, cancel the contract in part or whole in any of the following cases :if, contractor :-(a)x x x(b)x x x(c)x x x(d)x x x(e) in the opinion of the organisation architect at any time whether before or after the date or extended date for completion makes defaults in proceeding with the work with due diligence and continues in that state after reasonable notice from the architect and or organisation or(f)x x x(g)x x x"130. whenever the organisation exercises his authority to cancel the contract under clause 129, he may complete the works by any means at the contractor's risk and expense provided always that in event of cost of completion after alternative arrangements have been finalized by the organisation to get the works completed or estimated cost of completion (as certified by the architect) and approved by organisation being less than the contract cost, the advantage shall accrue to the organisation. if the cost of completion after the alternative arrangements have been finalised by the organisation to get the work completed or estimated cost of completion (as certified by the architect.) and approved by the organisation exceeds the money due to the contractor under this contract, the contractor shall either pay the excess amount assessed by the architect or the same shall be recovered from the contractor by other means."61. the learned arbitrators refused to enter into the questions as to whether the awho had made out a case for canceling the contract and invoking the risk and expense clause stating :"we do not consider it necessary to go into the question whether clause 130 requires certificate by the architect in case completion of the work is done at the risk and expense as urged by sspl or only where the alternative arrangements for completion of the work have not been finalised and estimated cost of completion is to be considered, as submitted by awho. in our opinion, clause 130 deals with a situation where awho completes or decides to complete the work on their own and has no application where the completion of the work is being permitted under an order passed in a judicial/arbitral proceeding. the certification by the architect is intended as a check against an arbitrary claim towards cost of completion. such a check is not required when the completion of the work is done in pursuance of an order in a judicial/arbitral proceeding because the court/arbitral tribunal would examine any such grievance of the other party. since in the present matter awho were allowed to complete the work under the order of the sole arbitrator dated november 1, 1997 which contained appropriate directions regarding the manner in which the contract shall be given, the certification of the architect contemplated by clause 130 was not required."62. the approach to the question by the learned arbitrators was wholly erroneous.63. an award made pursuant to an order which has been passed without jurisdiction necessarily must be held to be a nullity. refusal on the part of the learned arbitrator to consider the effect of clause 130 of the agreement would amount to a legal misconduct. having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, as would be discussed in details hereinafter, it was incumbent on the part of the arbitrators to apply "due diligence" clause contained in clause 129(e). more cautiously. they were further required to consider as to whether "due diligence" clause be applied where the alleged violation of contract was only in relation to a small part thereof. the learned arbitrators were, in law bound to consider the relevant provisions of the contract and in particular those which deal with the rights and liabilities of the parties.64. this aspect of the matter has not been taken into consideration by the learned arbitrators while making the award. thus, they failed to take into consideration a relevant fact.65. in steel authority of india ltd. (supra), this court categorically stated the law thus:"it was not open to the arbitrator to ignore the said conditions which, are binding on the contracting parties. by ignoring the same, he has acted beyond the jurisdiction conferred upon him. it is settled law that the arbitrator derives the authority from the contract and if he acts in manifest disregard of the contract, the award given by him would be are arbitrary one. this deliberate departure from the contract amounts not only to manifest disregard of the authority or misconduct, on his part, but it may tantamount to mala fide action."it was stated""further, the arbitration act does not give any power to the arbitrator to act arbitrarily or capriciously. his existence depends upon the agreement and his function is to act within the limits of the said agreement. in continental construction co. ltd. v. state of m.p. manu/sc/0114/1988manu/sc/0114/1988 : [1988]3scr103 this court considered the clauses of the contract which stipulated that the contractor had to complete the work in spite of rise in the prices of materials and also rise in labour charges at the rates stipulated in the contract.it is to be reiterated that to find out whether the arbitrator has travel led beyond his jurisdiction and acted beyond the terms of the agreement between the parties, the agreement is required to be looked into. it is true that interpretation of a particular condition in the agreement would be within the jurisdiction of the arbitrator. however, in cases where there is no question of interpretation of any term of the contract, but of solely reading the same as it is and still the arbitrator ignores it and awards the amount despite the prohibition in the agreement, the award would be arbitrary, capricious and without jurisdiction. whether the arbitrator has acted beyond the terms, of the contract; or has travelled beyond his jurisdiction would depend upon facts, which however would be jurisdictional facts, and are required to be gone into by the court. the arbitrator may have jurisdiction to entertain claim and yet he may not have jurisdiction to pass award for particular items in view of the prohibition contained in the contract and, in such cases, it would be a jurisdictional error. for this limited purpose reference to the terms of the contract is a must.(emphasis supplied)66. in shyama charan agarwala (supra) this court referred to the said decision.67. a bench of this court recently in bharat coking coal ltd. v. annapurna constructionmanu/sc/0641/2003manu/sc/0641/2003 : air2003sc3660 upon referring to a large number of decisions stated:"the question is as to whether the claim of the contractor is d'hors the terms or not was a matter which fell for consideration before the arbitrator. he was bound to consider the same. the jurisdiction of the arbitrator in such a matter must be held to be confined to the four-corners of the contract. he could not have ignored an important clause in the agreement; although it may be open to the arbitrator to arrive at a finding on the materials on records that the claimant's claim for additional work was otherwise justified."68. as regard the duty of the arbitrator to take into consideration the relevant provisions contained in the agreement, it was observed:"so far as these items are concerned, in our opinion, the learned sole arbitrator should have taken into consideration the relevant provisions contained in the agreement as also the correspondences passed between the parties. the question as to whether the work could not be completed within the period of four months or the extension was sought for on one condition or the other was justifiable or not, which are relevant facts and were required to be taken into consideration by the arbitrator.it is now well settled that the arbitrator cannot act arbitrarily, irrationally, capriciously or independent of the contract,"69. this court further opined;"there lies a clear distinction between an error within the jurisdiction and error in excess of jurisdiction. thus, the role of the arbitrator is to arbitrate within the terms of the contract. he has no power apart from what the parties have given him under the contract. if he has travelled beyond the contract, he would be acting without jurisdiction, whereas if he has remained inside the parameter of the contract, his award cannot be questioned on the ground that it contains an error apparent on the face of the records."70. referring to paragraph 577 of halsbury's laws of england, 4th edition, commercial arbitration by must ill and boyd at page 598, alopi parshad & sons ltd. v. union of india manu/sc/0057/1960manu/sc/0057/1960 : [1960]2scr793 , heyman v. darwin 1942 (1) all er 3273, associated engineering v. govt. of a.p. manu/sc/0054/1992manu/sc/0054/1992 : [1991]2scr924 , state of orissa v. dandasi sahu manu/sc/0488/1988manu/sc/0488/1988 : air1988sc1791 , k.p. poulose v. state of kerala manu/sc/0037/1975manu/sc/0037/1975 : air1975sc1259 , k.v. george v. the secretary to government, water and power dept, trivendrum manu/sc/0253/1989manu/sc/0253/1989 : air1990sc53 , satish kumar v. surinder kumar manu/sc/0264/1968manu/sc/0264/1968 : [1969]2scr244 , union of india v. jain associates and anr. manu/sc/0752/1994manu/sc/0752/1994 : [1994]3scr551 , sikkim subba associates v. state of sikkim manu/sc/0313/2001manu/sc/0313/2001 : [2001]3scr261 , maharashtra state electricity board v. sterilite industries (india) and anr. manu/sc/0627/2001manu/sc/0627/2001 : air2001sc2933 , w.b. state warehousing corporation and anr. v. sushil kumar kayan and ors. manu/sc/0425/2002manu/sc/0425/2002 : air2002sc2185 , bharat coking coal ltd. v. l.k. ahuja & co. manu/sc/0116/2001manu/sc/0116/2001 : [2001]1scr1152 and ispat engineering & foundry works, b.s. city, bokaro v. steel authority of india ltd., b.s. city, bokaro manu/sc/0389/2001manu/sc/0389/2001 : [2001]3scr1190 this court observed:"however, as noticed hereinbefore, this case stands on a different footing, namely, that the arbitrator while passing the award in relation to some items failed and/or neglected to take into consideration the relevant clauses of the contract, nor did he take into consideration the relevant materials for the purpose of arriving at a correct (sic finding of) fact, such an order would amount to misdirection in law."71. before the learned arbitrators a question arose as to whether certification of architect as regard estimated cost of completion was a condition precedent for determination of the quantum of damages. construction of clauses 129 and 130 having regard to the fact situation obtaining herein was mandatorily required to be considered by the learned arbitrators. they could not have been simply ignored the same on the premise that an interim order has been passed by the arbitrator. an arbitrator cannot be equated with a court of law, whereas court has an inherent power; an arbitrator does not have. it is a tribunal of limited jurisdiction. its jurisdiction is circumscribed by the terms and reference. an arbitrator can act only within the four corners of the agreement and not beyond thereto.72. yet again this court in union of india v. v. pundarikakshudu and sons and anr. manu/sc/0691/2003manu/sc/0691/2003 : air2003sc3209 dealt in details about an award which was found to be inconsistent, observing:"the question as to whether one party or the other was responsible for delay in causing completion of the contract job, thus, squarely fell for consideration before the arbitrator. the arbitrator could not have arrived at a finding that both committed breaches of the terms of contract which was ex facie unsustainable being wholly inconsistent. clause 54 of the contract could be invoked only when the first respondent committed breach of the terms of the contract. an action in terms thereof could be taken recourse to in its entirety or not at all. if one part of the award is inconsistent with the other and furthermore if in determining the disputes between the parties the arbitrator failed to take into consideration the relevant facts or based his decision on irrelevant factors not germane therefor: the arbitrator must be held to have committed a legal-misconduct."73. this court made a distinction between an award passed within jurisdiction and an award without jurisdiction stating:"in this case the district judge as also the high court of madras clearly held that the award cannot be sustained having regard to the inherent inconsistency contained therein. the arbitrator, as has been correctly held by the district judge and the high court, committed a legal misconduct in arriving at an inconsistent finding as regard breach of the contract on the part of one party or the other. once the arbitrator had granted damages to the first respondent which could be granted only on a finding that the appellant had committed breach of the terms of contract and, thus, was responsible therefore, any finding contrary thereto and inconsistent therewith while awarding any sum in favour of the appellant would be wholly unsustainable being self contradictory."74. this court cannot sit in appeal over the award of the arbitrator but can certainly interfere when the award suffers from non-application of mind or when relevant fact is ignored or irrelevant fact not germane for deciding the dispute is taken into consideration.75. where an order has been passed without jurisdiction, the principles of estoppel, waiver and acquiescence will have no application. there is no estoppel against statute.76. the award, therefore, suffers from legal misconduct on the part of the arbitrators.role of an architect:77. an architect plays an important role in execution of a building contract.78. in hudson's building and engineering contracts at page 243, it is stated:"an architect is a person, who professes skill in the art of designing buildings to meet his client's need, in the organization of the contractual arrangements for their construction, and in the supervision of work and contractual, administration until final completion. so a major part of an architect's activities will be concerned with the preparation of contracts, the obtaining and recommending for acceptance of estimates from builders, the selection of specialist contractors, the inspection of work carried out, the solution of difficulties encountered during the course of erecting the building, condemning and dealing with defective work, the issue of certificates under the terms of the contract and advising or ruling on disputes between the owner and the contractor. thus it will be seen that although it is the primary and vital function of the architect to create new ideas of amenity and design and to set down those ideas on a drawing-board, his duties extend far into other fields of technical knowledge and business management. on the other hand, while he will remain primarily responsible to the owner for all matters of design, modern techniques of construction and specialized building products and processes in fact demand expertise and skill for which he will inevitably not always be personally qualified. the employment of outside consultants or the less satisfactory (from the legal point of view if the employer's interest is to be properly protected) device of delegating important design functions to specialist and sub-contractors and suppliers, are therefore a frequent and inevitable accompaniment of many major building projects but as will be seen, the architect is the "captain of the ship" and will be the person to whom the owner will normally look if a design failure occurs, though in some, but not all, cases he will adequately discharge his own overall responsibility if he exercises due professional care in referring matters outside his own expertise to a consultant or specialist supplier or contractor, particularly if these latter are engaged on behalf of the owner and not by the architect himself."79. an architect has, thus, various roles to play including independently ruling on disputes between the owner and the contractor.80. in r. v. architects' registration tribunal, ex. p. jaggar [1945] 2 all er 131, it is stated:"an architect is one who possesses, with due regard to aesthetic as well as practical consideration, adequate skill and knowledge to enable him (i) to originate, (ii) to design and plan, (iii) to arrange for and supervise, the erection of such buildings or other works calling for skill in design and planning as he might in the course of his business reasonably be asked to carry out or in respect of which he offers his services as a specialist."81. an architect has a great role to play in making an estimate. he is expected to neither under-estimate nor can over-estimate value of the works, he is bound by his conduct to the owner. he can be sued for his negligence. for his misconduct, fees payable to him may be forfeited. he may incur other liabilities not only under the contract but also under statute.82. clause 130 of the contract casts a burden upon an architect to estimate the damages when a risk and cost-clause is invoked against the contractor. it is possible to hold that the invocation of arbitration clause would be subject to exercise of the jurisdiction by the architect as a demand has to be made upon the contractor depending on such estimate made by the architect.83. in a given case having regard to the reasonableness of the estimated amount a contractor may pay the same or challenge the same either by an arbitrator or by a court of law. a dispute may fall for adjudication by an arbitrator or by a court of law only in the event a contractor refuses to accept such estimate.84. in g.t. gajria's law relating to building and engineering contracts in india, fourth edition at page 563, it is stated:"in a contract, where there is certificate clause which is a condition precedent to payment and "an arbitration clause of some third person other than the architect, the builder cannot recover without the certificate, and neither the arbitrator nor the court (apart always from some misconduct of the architect), has jurisdiction to consider any matters. in respect of which the certificate of the architect by the terms of the contract is made a condition precedent."85. an architect sometimes is appointed as an arbitrator and no payment can be made except on his certificate and sometimes his position is that of a person whose certificate is held to be a condition precedent for invoking the arbitration clause [see bristol corporation v. john aird & co. (1911) all e.r. rep. 1076, hickman and co. v. roberts (1911) all e.r. rep. 1485 and south india rly. co. ltd. v. s.m. bhashyam naidu, air 1935 mad. 356.86. these decisions were considered by a division bench of the madhya pradesh high court in heavy electricals (india) ltd. bhopal v. pannalal davchand malviya manu/mp/0005/1973manu/mp/0005/1973 : air1973mp787. in this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the arbitrator could not have ignored the role of the architect in terms of clause 130 of the agreement only on the ground that awho had been permitted to raise construction, pursuant to or in furtherance of an interim order. non-consideration of the said clause in proper perspective by the arbitrator would amount to a legal misconduct on their part.whose duty it was to get the plan sanctioned:88. m/s. dulal mukherjee & associates had been the architect of sumangal. by reason of the agreement, however, he became an architect of the employer. it was in the aforementioned situation, the following was agreed between the parties and the same was recorded in the contract agreement as under:"26. company informed that they have negotiated with m/s dulal mukherjee & associates, 28-8, shakespeare sarani, calcutta as architects for providing all architectural services for this turn key project. as per the understanding of the company with the architect, the company has to pay to the architect at the firm rate of rs. 6/- per sq. ft. of built-up area excluding stilt area for the turn key project. the stilt area is not to be taken into account while calculating the amount of fee payable to the architect. architect fee for all internal services, development of land, all external services and stilt area is deemed to be included in the rates of rs. 6.00 per sq. ft. for built up area.27. it is hereby mutually agreed and accepted that the services of the architect m/s dulal mukherjee & associates, with immediate effect shall be controlled by the organisation and the payments due to the architects will be made by the organisation direct. for making this payment an amount calculated at rs. 6.00 per sq. ft. of built up area as per para 16(d) above shall not be released by the organisation to the company. the payments due to the architect for his architectural services shall be released by the organisation in terms of separate agreement entered by the organisation "with m/s dulal mukherjee & associates, the architects. for the architectural services rendered by the architect upto the signing of this agreement, the company is fully responsible for any omissions and commissions. for all architectural services after the signing of this agreement, the organisation will take the responsibility. the company has paid a sum of rs. 5.00 lacs as adhoc advance to the architect. this amount shall be reimbursed by the organisation to the company and shall be adjusted against the total amount payable to the architects by the organisation."89. architectural services have not been defined in the agreement. however, in a letter dated 12.6.1991 issued by awho to m/s. dulal mukherjee & associates it was mentioned that obtaining and getting preparation of municipal drawings and obtaining sanctions was the architect's responsibility, stating:"1. please refer to your letter of 04 jun 91 following the detailed discussions on the project held on 03 & 04 jun 91 at this hq.2. as per understanding arrived at between awho and m/s. sumangal services pvt. ltd. your employment and payment will be controlled by awho. please note that the rate of rs. 6/- per sq.ft. as agreed between you and m/s. sumangal services pvt., ltd. remain operative for architectural services including supervision.3. for the release of payment the amount of rs. 5 lacs that is already been paid by m/s. sumangal services pvt. ltd. to you as on date will also be taken into account. recoveries @ rs. 6/- per sq. ft. will be considered as overall payment and will be recovered from m/s. sumangal services pvt. ltd. during execution of project and paid to you on time to time through your bills.4. it is also understood that prior to issue of this letter following works towards the project has already been undertaken by you.a.) preparation of conceptual plan,b) interaction with local sanctioning authorities.c) preparation of municipal drawings and obtaining sanction.5. based on the discussions between awho. m/s. sumangal services pvt. ltd. and you held in delhi on 03 & 04 jun 91 it is decided that till project manager and staff has been posted, you will monitor the progress on behalf of awho. you will also forward a weekly report on the same.6. the contract documents between you and awho is under drafting and would come in effect when ready.7. please acknowledge."90. despite the fact, by reason of the contract agreement the services of the architect were placed solely at the disposal of awho, it purported to have entered into another agreement wherein sumangal was not a party on or about 24th february, 1992 wherein the responsibility of the architect was defined as under:"12. architects responsibilities. except to the extent otherwise stipulated in this agreement, the responsibility and services of the architect shall include the responsibilities and obligations of architects as laid down by the indian institute of architects (except net liability and net schedule of payments) and will particularly include the following obligations of the architect :-(e) preparation of drawings for submission to civil agencies excluding obtaining sanctions which will be done by builder/contractor but should guide the builder/contractor but should guide the builder/contractor in obtaining the same."91. legally the said agreement was not binding on sumangal as it was not a party thereto.92. para 17 of the agreement provides for stages for release of payments which reads thus:stage	rate per sq. ft., of plinth area(aa)	sanction of plans by zila parshad gram panchayat	rs.3.00(ab)	on registration of converted land	rs. 33.00(ac)	de-watering land and clearance of hyacinth	rs. 2.00(ad)	survey and soil test	rs. 1.00(ae)	filling of earth to raise the level to vip road	rs. 12.00(af)	alongwith the progress of building construction	rs. 15.00total		rs. 66.00"93. it does not appear to be the case of the awho that there is a contractual obligation on the part of sumangal to get the plan sanctioned. in any event, such a contractual obligation for the purpose of attracting the penal clauses must appear from the contract itself and not from any other document.94. the learned arbitrators in their award did not point out any specific clause in terms whereof it was for sumangal to get the plan sanctioned. it merely relying or on the basis of a letter of sumangal made it partially liable therefore.95. no document exists to show that sumangal had any legal liability to get the municipal plan sanctioned.96. section 204 of the west bengal municipal act, 1993 prohibits erection of any building excepting with the previous sanction of the board of councillors. in terms of section 205 it is for the person who intends to erect or re-erect a building to submit an application with a building plan in such form.97. the provisions of the west bengal municipal act, 1993 go to show that it was for awho to submit an application for sanction of the building plan together with requisite documents therefore. ordinarily, the duty to pursue sanction of a plan is of the owner or its authorised representative. such a job, it is common experience, is done by a qualified architect or the persons having regard to their duties to prepare a building plan in terms of the building laws so as to enable them to make clarifications as and when called upon by the statutory authorities or in a given case make modifications or alterations thereof, the building, plans prepared by the architects only would be subject-matter of sanction by the municipal authorities. furthermore, from the letter dated 8.12.1994 also it is evident that awho prayed for alterations of the master plan and in the said letter it has clearly been stated that m/s dulal mukherjee & associates had been appointed by them as consulting architect for the project. from a perusal of the letter dated 21.7.1995 issued by the rajarhat gopalpur municipality to shri manohar singh, project manager, awho, it would appear that the author thereof had discussed the matter with shri manohar singh as also with m/s dulal mukherjee & associates and only with them, views were exchanged as regard the norms of municipal rules and regulations. from the letter dated 27.5.1995 issued by awho to sumangal, it appears that shri manohar singh, its project manager along with representatives of m/s dulal mukherjee & associates had a detailed meeting with chairman, rajarhat gopalpur municipality wherein it was agreed that the work need not be stepped for which its plans had already been approved. the alleged responsibility of sumangal to get the plan sanctioned has been raised only in july-august, 1995, i.e. after the dispute between the parties started.98. the municipality made awho responsible for coordination and construction activities. the stop work notice was served upon awho. awho in its letter, as noticed hereinbefore, categorically stated that its representative with the authorised representative of the architect saw the chairman in 1995. awho and not sumangal made other correspondences with the municipality. if sumangal was assisting them in getting the plan passed, it, in law, did not incur any liability therefore, the findings of the learned arbitrators, therefore, do not borne out from the records and are perverse.99. it will amount to giving of premium to illegality if it be held that a party can ignore statutory injunction on the specious plea that the same is minor in nature and maybe validated by the statutory authorities in future. neither any party can undertake any construction activity on the pains of facing criminal charge nor any court of law/arbitral tribunal encourage such violation either directly or indirectly.100. furthermore, risk and cost clause cannot be invoked on failure of the party to respond to its self-imposed obligation. damages are to be paid for willful breach of the terms or conditions of the contract. such a breach must be in relation to an express agreement entered into by and between the parties. an alleged breach on the part of a builder cannot be founded on a mere ipse dixit. the learned arbitrators in their award purported to have held :"...that sspl had a role in getting the plans sanctioned by the competent authority is borne out by letter of awho to sspl dated october 25, 1995 (ex.e-45, awho. vol.3, p.356) and the reply of sspl dated december 9, 1994 (ex.e-103, awho. vol. 17, p.54) to the said letter of awho. in the said letter of awho dated october 25, 1994. it was stated :"7. sanctioning of building plan and revised lay out plan. sanction of building plan and revised lay out plans has already been considerably delayed. this is effecting the progress of the work also. though dma is taking action but the follow up action as a part of the turnkey project is to be taken by you. please ensure that the sanction is obtained without- further delay." (awho vol.3, p.357. para 7) sspl in their reply dated december 9. 1994 said :"g) sanctioning of building plan - you have been informed during several discussions in your office in new delhi that there had been structural change in the local authority system affecting the project area. for some considerable period vacuum existed in many standard local govt. functions. however, the new municipality authority has recently been formed. we are following up with the new authority in respect of the sanctioning process." [awho, vol. 17, p.56(g)]101. the letter dated 25.10.1994 referred to in the award clearly shows that the architect was asked to take action but allegedly the follow up action was to be taken by sumangal only on the ground that the project was a turnkey one. sumangal's letter dated 9.12.1994 merely stated that there had been structural change in the local authority system affecting the project area and there had been some vacuum in many standard" local government functions and that they had been following up with the new authority in respect of the sanctioning process. presumably in the aforementioned backdrop, the learned arbitrators observed :"we are, therefore, unable to hold that the entire responsibility for obtaining sanction for the plans from the competent authority had been transferred from sspl to awho after june 12, 1991 and thereafter awho and dma were responsible for obtaining the said sanction."102. thus, merely some role had been attributed to sumangal in the matter of getting the plan sanctioned and not a breach of contract leading to incurring its liability under clause 130 of the agreement.effect of such agreement, assuming there was one103. there cannot be an agreement that somebody would be bound to obtain a statutory order from the statutory authorities, as thereover, he would have no control.104. in the law lexicon, the maxim 'ex turpi causa non orator actio' is defined as:"on a bad (illegal) consideration on action can arise."105. as regard the question as to whether such a contract in its entirety or to some extent would be illegal or not which would give rise to further question as regard its enforceability, we may notice the following passage from immami appa rao and ors. v. gollapalli, ramalingamurthi and ors. manu/sc/0051/1961manu/sc/0051/1961 : [1962]3scr739 :"reported decisions bearing on this question show that consideration of this problem often gives rise to what may be described as a battle of legal maxims, the appellants emphasised that the doctrine which is pre-eminently applicable to the present case is ex dolo malo non orator actio or ex turpi cause non orator actio. in other words, they contended that the right of action cannot arise out of fraud or out of transgression of law; and according to them it is necessary in such a case that possession should rest where it lies in pari delicto potior est conditio possidenties; where each party is equally in fraud the law favours him who is actually in possession, or where both parties are equally guilty the estate will lie where it falls. on the other hand, respondent 1 argues that the proper maxim to apply is nemo a llegans seam turpitudinum audiendum est, whoever has first to plead turpitudinum should fail; that party fails who first has to allege fraud in which he participated. in other words, the principle invoked by respondent 1 is that a man cannot plead his own fraud. in deciding the question as to which maxim should govern the present case it is necessary to recall what lord wright, m.r. observed about these maxims in berg v. sadler and moore [1937] 2 k. b. 158. referring to the maxim ex turpi causa non orator actio lord wright observed that "this maxim, though veiled in the dignity of learned language, is a statement, of a principle of great importance; but like most maxims it is much too vague and much too general to admit of application without, a careful consideration of the circumstances and of the various definite rules which have been laid down by the authorities".106. in kuju collieries ltd. v. jharknand mines ltd. and ors. manu/sc/0030/1974manu/sc/0030/1974 : [1975]1scr703 this court held that in relation to a contract which is hit by section 23 of the contract act section 75 and section 70 of the contract act shall not apply. only in a case where a contract has become void due to subsequent happenings, the advantage gained by a person should be restored.107. the building plans would be sanctioned provided the same are in accordance with the statutory building rules. if admittedly the plans as also the constructions were not in terms of rules, question of getting them sanctioned by a statutory authority would not arise. such a contract, it is reiterated, would be illegal. principle of estoppel will have not application in relation thereto as that part of the agreement itself would not be enforceable. in the event, however, the builder was merely required to take follow-up action in the matter with the authorities, the contract may be valid but in that event it must not only be pleaded and proved that there existed an agreement in that behalf, but also to how and to what extent the builder failed to perform its' part of the contract. the findings of the learned arbitrators are without any materials and without applying the correct legal principles and, thus, the same cannot be sustained.108. admittedly, the deviations which were minor ones were regularized only on 23rd april, 1997. the contract, however, stood terminated on 17th october, 1395.109. even in the ordinary course, sumangal could not have carried out any construction activities in anticipation that such deviations might be regularized. whether such deviations would, be regularized in respect of phase i or whether building plans for phase ii and phase iii would be sanctioned and if so within what time could only be a matter of speculation but the same would be irrelevant for determining the liabilities of the parties which was required to be guided by commercial considerations.110. the liability to pay damages must arise out of contract and not otherwise. the award does not specifically say sofrustration of contract:section 56 of the indian contract act reads thus:"agreement to do impossible act:- an agreement to do an act impossible in itself is void.contract to do act afterwards becoming impossible or unlawful:-a contract to do an act which, after the contract is made, becomes impossible, or, by reason of some event which the promisor could not prevent, unlawful, becomes void when the act becomes impossible or unlawful.compensation for loss through non-performance of act known to be impossible or unlawful:-- where one person has promised to do something which he knew, or, with reasonable diligence, might have known, and which the promise did not know, to be impossible or unlawful, such promisor must make compensation to such promise for any loss which such promise sustains through the non-performance of the promise."111. impossibility to fulfill the contractual obligation may arise in different fact situations.112. statutory injunction by a statutory authority may be one of such causes. a building bye-law must be scrupulously followed. violation of section 204 of the west bengal municipal act, 1993 attracts penal provisions contained in section 440. it is, therefore, mandatory in nature. the correspondences between awho and the municipality clearly show that even infrastructure works were not permitted to be carried out. sumangal, therefore, cannot be said to have committed any illegality in complying with the stop work notice, to what extent it committed breach of the terms of the contract, assuming that it could have carried out some job as pointed out by awho would depend upon the commercial viability as a large number of workmen were to be engaged although it cannot carry out the major construction work, which was a relevant factor for determining the quantum of damages. sumangal might have been partially liable but it cannot be faulted when it refused to carry out any constructional work in violation of the stop work notice which would attract the penal provisions of section 440 of the west bengal municipal act, 1993.113. the learned arbitrators were also bound to take into consideration this aspect of the matter. they failed to do so and misdirected themselves in law.114. in an interesting article titled "the principle of impossibility in contract" by h.w.r. wade published in law quarterly review volume 56 page 519, it is stated:"two points emerge from the argument so far: (i) there can exist no duty to do an impossible act. (ii) a promise is, normally and primarily, a promise of performance simply, and not of damages in the alternative. the effect of supervening impossibility on an existing duty can now be determined, and in view of conclusion (i) the answer is a simple one. it must be that the impossibility causes the duty to cease to exist. for a duty either exists or it does not - that is to say, every duty continues until it is discharged, and discharge is the only process known to the law by which a duty once legally undertaken can be put off the shoulders of the obligee. its effect is a complete removal of the obligation, and discharge by impossibility of performance is no less perfect than discharge by the performance of the original promise. in the words of professor corbin already cited, 'society no longer commands performance' - nothing more can be demanded of the promisor."115. in emden and gill's buildings contracts and practice, seventh edition, page 162-163, it is stated that liability to pay damages for non-performance of an impossibility only arises where the contract is absolute and unrestricted by any condition expressed or implied. it is further stated that a difficulty may not in all circumstances amount to impossibility. but even in that event the terms and conditions relating to performance of the contract may stand eclipsed.116. the transaction was a commercial one. sumangal could not plead frustration of contract if it itself had abandoned it. (see hauman v. nortje [1914] a.d. 293 and hoenig v. issacs [1952] 2 all e.r. 176.117. it is well-settled that, a builder renouncing his obligations could not claim substantial performance.118. in hudson's building and engineering contracts at page 484, the law is stated as:"a further overriding principle to be deduced from the cases, it is submitted, is that a party consciously in breach, a fortiori a party repudiating an obligation or abandoning work, should not be enabled to abuse the doctrine by maintaining that position while at the same time suing for remuneration under the contract. thus in south africa, there is long-standing authority that substantial performance is not available where work is abandoned, or the method of performance is inconsistent with an honest intention to carry out the work in accordance with the contract. sumpter v. hedges and ibmac v. marshall were clear cases of abandonment."119. such a case of abandonment was not made out. what was made out was a case of self-inducement frustration. we repeatedly asked mr. tiwari to show before us any pleading as regard self-induced frustration on the part of sumangal. he failed to do so. no material far less any pleading has also been placed before us to show that there had been collusion by and between sumangal and municipal authorities in getting the work stopped. there exists a presumption as regard the official transactions having been done in regular course of business. the onus of proving that plea of frustration was self-induced one is on the party who alleges that this is the case. (see joseph constantine steamship line ltd. v. imperial smelting corporation ltd. 1942] a.c. 154120. in treitel's law of contract, seventh edition at page 701, it is stated:"the onus of proving that frustration is self-induced is on the party who alleges that this is the case. in joseph constantine ss line v. imperial smelting corp. ltd. (1942) ac 154 a ship was disabled by an explosion, from performing her obligations under a charter party. the owners were sued for damages and pleaded that the explosion frustrated the charter party. the charters argued that the owners must prove that the explosion was not due to their fault, but the house of lords rejected this argument and upheld the defence of frustration although the cause of the explosion was never explained. the rule is open to the objection that the charterer is much less likely than the owner to be able to show how the explosion occurred. this reasoning does, indeed, prevail in one group of cases: a person to whom goods have been bailed, and who seeks to rely on their destruction as a ground of frustration of the contract, of bailment, must show that the destruction was not due to any breach of his duty as a bailee. but, this special situation excepted, the rule as to burden of proof laid down in the joseph constantine case can be defended on the ground that generally catastrophic events which prevent performance do occur without the fault of either party. to impose the burden of disproving fault on the party relying on frustration is therefore less likely than the converse rule to lead to the right result in the majority of cases."121. it is interesting to note that at page 700 of the said treatise, the learned author states:"the further question arises whether, a contract can be frustrated by an event brought about by the negligent act of one of the parties. lord simon has put the case of a prima donna who lost her voice through carelessly catching cold. he seemed to incline to the view that she could plead frustration so long as the incapacity "was not deliberately induced in order to get out of the engagement." this particular result can perhaps be justified by the difficulty of foreseeing the effect of conduct on one's health. but it is submitted that generally negligence should exclude frustration: for example, the plea should have failed in taylor v. caldwell if the fire had been due to the negligence of the defendants. in such a case it would be unjust to make the other party bear the loss. a negligent omission should likewise exclude frustration."122. in cheshire, fifoot & furmston's law of contract (14th edition) at page 643, the law is stated, thus:"this rule, that a party cannot claim to be discharged by a frustrating event for which he is himself responsible, does not require him to prove affirmatively that the event occurred without his fault. the onus of proving that the frustration was self-induced rests upon the party raising this allegation. for instance :on the day before a chartered ship was due to load her cargo an explosion of such violence occurred in her auxiliary boiler that the performance of the charter-party became impossible. the cause of the explosion could not be definitely ascertained, but only one of three possible reasons would have imputed negligence to the shipowners.it was held by the house of lords that, since the charterers were unable to prove that the explosion was caused by the fault of the owners, the defence of frustration succeeded and the contract was discharged. it should perhaps be rioted that in many cases a self-induced frustrating event will be a breach of contract but this will not necessarily be so. in maritime national fish ltd. v. ocean trawlers ltd (1935) ac 524, the applicants were not contractually bound to licence the chartered trawler but could not excuse failure to pay hire by relying on the absence of a licence."123. even no case of negligence on the part of sumangal made out.124. the burden of proof in relation to all these pleas, thus, was on awho. it failed to discharge the same.quantum of damages:125. it is not necessary for us to go into the question of quantum of damages in details but we may observe that the learned arbitrators proceeded on a wrong premise even in relation thereto. it took into consideration the subsequent events. purported subsequent conduct on the part of sumangal became the bed-rock of the findings against it by the learned arbitrators. the disputes and differences between the parties were required to be determined as on 10.10.1395. conduct of the parties subsequent thereto was wholly irrelevant. thus, there exists an error apparent on the face of the award.126. liability to pay damages would indisputably arise only in the event a breach of contract has taken place. clause 130 of the general conditions of the contract could be invoked only in the event of breach on the part of sumangal and if awho could in law take recourse to clause 129 of the contract.127. for the purpose of invoking clause 129(d) of the general conditions of contract, it was incumbent upon the learned arbitrators to arrive at a specific finding that a breach of the terms of condition has been committed by sumangal. such breach must be in relation to a term of the contract between the parties.128. if a breach has occurred in respect of an agreement, to which sumangal is not a party, clause 129 could not have been invoked.129. the law relating to damages in this behalf is stated in mcgregor on damages, 16th edition at paras 1142 and 1143 in the following terms :"the normal measure of damages is the cost to the owner of completing the building in a reasonable manner less the contract price, and possibly, in addition, the value of the use of the premises lost by reason of the delay, this measure of cost of completion less contract price is laid down by the court, of appeal in mertens v. home freeholds co., (1921) 2 k.b. 526, ca., which must be regarded perforce as the leading case since it proves to be the only one dealing with this issue. the defendant contracted to build a house for the plaintiff and was to begin work immediately after possession of the site was given to him. the defendant worked well for a month, but then deliberately failed to proceed with due dispatch in the knowledge that a government embargo on building without licence was to be imposed. had he worked according to contract, the roof could have been on to the house before the embargo descended. two or three years later the plaintiff completed the work himself, when building was again permitted but when costs had risen. it was held that the proper measure of damages was the cost to the plaintiff of completion in a reasonable manner at the earliest moment that he was allowed to proceed with building, less the amount he would have had to pay the defendant had the defendant completed the house as far as the roofing-in at the time agreed by the terms of the contract. the court of appeal reversed the divisional court which had taken for its basic figure not the cost of completion but the market value that the completed building would have had at the contractual time due for completion. of this lord sterndale m.r. said :"they (the divisional court) have treated the contract as if it were one for the sale of goods and have held that the measure of damages is the difference between the market price of the day of what the plaintiff ought to have had and what he got. in my humble opinion that is an entirely wrong way of looking at the contract, there is no contract to deliver goods, and there is no market price for a roofed house."mertens v. home freeholds co. (1921) 2 k.b. 526, is also authority for taking the cost of completion as at the time when it became once again legal to build, although between breach and the removal of the government embargo on building two or three years afterwards costs had risen substantially. and conversely, as younger l.j. pointed out, "if the cost of building had decreased in that time the damages would have been correspondingly diminished". this rule is however subject to the general principles of mitigation so that, in the words of lord sterndale."the building owner must set to work "to build his house at a reasonable time and in a reasonable manner., and is not entitled to delay for several years and then, if prices have gone up, charge the defaulting builder with the increased price."130. we may, however, notice that in clark and anr. v. woor [1965] 1 w.l.r. 650 and east ham borough corporation v. bernard sunley & sons ltd. 1966 ac 406, law almost to the similar effect has been laid down.131. in hudson's building and engineering contracts at page 1034-35, it is stated:"builders constructed a school with serious defects in fixing the stone facing. the contract was in the 1956 riba standard form. some years after the final certificate, a stone fell and the owners discovered the defects. the arbitrator found that the defects could have been, but in fact were not, discovered or noticed by the architect during the course of his normal supervision of the work. at the date of the breach (which the parties agreed should for purposes of convenience be treated as the date of completing the work), the cost of repair would have been considerably less, due to rising prices, than it was when the owners finally discovered the defects. held, by mel ford stevenson j., distinguishing phillips v. ward (1956) 1 w.l.r. 471 that since the owners had been guilty of no unreasonable delay once they discovered the defects, they were entitled to the greater cost of the repairs at the time they carried them out. held, by the house of lords, affirming the judge, that the parties must have contemplated that the architect might fail to notice defective work. the cost of repair at the date of discovering the breach was "on the cards" or a "loss liable to result" from the breach within the test formulated by asquith l.j. in the victoria laundry case. per lord upjohn: "where the cost of reinstatement is the proper measure of damages it necessarily follows as a matter of common sense that in the ordinary case the cost must be assessed at the time when the defect is discovered and put right and it is not suggested here that the building owner unreasonably delayed the work of repair after discovery of the defect...i am at a loss to understand why the negligent builder should be able to limit his liability by reason of the fact that at some earlier stage the architect failed to notice some defective work..." east ham borough council v. bernard sunley ltd. (1968.) a.c.406."132. reference may also be made to illustrations given in hudson's building and engineering contracts at pages 10-38-39.133. in emden and gill's buildings contracts and practice, seventh edition, at page 267, the law is stated thus :"the measure of damages for failure by the contractor to complete a building or engineering contract will include first, the difference (if any) between the price of the work as agreed upon in the contract and the cost the employer is actually put to in its completion (i), and cost of completion means cost of the completion of the contract work itself.illustrationa builder agreed in may, 1916, to build a house for plaintiff for a lump sum, complete within a specified time. after starting the work the builder intentionally delayed progress for the purpose of ensuring that the ministry of munitions should refuse a licence for construction of the house under defence of the realm regulations, and that he would thereby (as he thought) be released from the contract. the licence was refused, and the work had to be entirely suspended till 1919, when plaintiff completed the building. - held: the builder could not take advantage of a prevention brought about by his own act, and the proper measure of damages was what it cost the plaintiff to complete the house as soon as the statutory restriction ceased, less any amount which have been due and payable to the builder if he had proceeded with due diligence up to the date when the licence was refused.in a leading case, the house of lords has held that the proper measure of damages is the cost of re-instatement, such cost must be assessed at the time when the defects are discovered and are put right."134. sumangal, thus, could have been found liable for drawings if inter alia it was guilty of one or the other misconducts as referred to hereinbefore.title in respect of 14.17 acres of land:135. claim no. 1 related to title of 14.17 acres of land. sumangal entered into an agreement on a turn-key basis. the contention of sumangal is that the lands were transferred in the name of awho by way of security. this may or may not be so. but, herein we are only concerned with the question as to whether the award can be set aside or not. the learned arbitrator took into consideration the respective contentions of the parties and came to the conclusion that title has, by reason of the deeds of sale, passed on to awho. while arriving at the said finding, the arbitrator has not applied wrong principle of law. sumangal procured land on behalf of awho. it for a specific purpose and with a view to avoid double payment of stamp duty entered into an arrangement whereby the owners of the agricultural land executed sale deeds in favour of awho. subject of course to furnishing bank guarantee sumangal received consideration. sumangal stated that by getting the land transferred in the their name by way of security at a nominal price, as part of the turn key project, awho has gained enormously to the tune of about 11.40 crores which they are not entitled to retain lawfully. they, thus, have unjustly enriched themselves. it does not appear that such a case has been made out before the learned arbitrators. the plea of unjust enrichment, therefore, cannot be allowed to be raised at this juncture. such consideration was passed on to the owners of the land. requirements of section 54 of the transfer of property act in respect of sale transaction were fully complied with. title to the said land, thus, apparently vested in awho and has become absolute its owners. no exception, thus, to that part of the award can be taken.conclusion:136. however, we would like to clarify that the observations made hereinbefore were meant for the purpose of demonstrating that the learned arbitrators failed to apply the correct principles of law but not for the purpose of determining finally the lis between the parties. in other words, the questions have been posed and answered for the limited purpose as to whether the award of the learned arbitrators suffer from any legal infirmity within the meaning of sections 30 and 33 of the arbitration act and no more.137. we, therefore, for the aforementioned reasons, while upholding claim no. 1 of the award are of the opinion that the award of the arbitrations in relation to claim no. 2 must be set aside. consequently, no interest thereupon shall be payable.138. the i.a. no. 11 of 2002 is allowed to the aforementioned extent. no costs.
g.p. mathur, j.1. this petition under article 129 of the constitution has been filed by m/s ashok paper kamgar union through its president shri umadhar prasad singh for initiating contempt proceedings against the respondents for violation of orders passed by this court on 8.7.1996, 1.5.1997 and 31.7.2000 in writ petition no. 174 of 1991. initially the respondents arrayed in the contempt petition were shri dharam godha, chairman, nouveau capital & finance ltd., shri s. jagadeesan, joint secretary, ministry of industry, deptt. of industrial policy and promotion, government of india; and shri g.s. kang, secretary, department of industry, govt. of bihar. subsequently, shri s.n. khan, chairman and managing director and shri r.p. chhabra, chief general manager, rehabilitation finance department, industrial development bank of india, were also impleaded as respondents.2. ashok paper mills was a joint sector company and its shares were held by government of bihar, government of assam and industrial development bank of india (for short 'idbi'). the company had two units; one in darbhanga, bihar and the other in assam. the company became sick in the year 1988 and was referred to bifr. a decision was taken on 15.11.1989 to bifurcate the two units and give the responsibility of administering/taking over the units to the concerned state governments. the assam unit was thus taken over by the government of assam in 1990. the bihar unit was, however, not taken over by the government of bihar. the petitioner m/s ashok paper kamgar union then filed a writ petition under article 32 of the constitution in this court praying that a direction be issued to the government of bihar to take over the unit. initially, it was felt that an appropriate legislation was required to be issued and the state government also indicated that it would issue on ordinance. the writ petition remained pending for several years and different proposals were considered by this court. ultimately, in the year 1996, the government of india moved a proposal under which a private party, namely nouveau capital & finance ltd. (for short 'ncfl") was to take over the unit and a scheme for the said purpose was formulated on 28.6,1996, which was accepted by this court on 8.7.1996. since the main grievance of the petitioner is that the terms of the scheme have not been complied with by the respondents, it is necessary to reproduce the main provisions thereof, which are as under :1.0 take over of the unit by m/s. nonveau capital and finance. ltd. nouveau capital & finance ltd. will take over ashok paper milk bihar unit at following terms and conditions.1.1 ncfl will acquire the share holding of government of bihar, government of assam and financial institutions as per following terms:-(a) write down of capital by 90%(b) payment of written down face value within a period of 12 months from the date of handing over, the possession of the unit.1.2 ncfl will pay a fixed consideration of rs. 6 crores and thereupon take over of the unit without any liability. this amount will be paid by ncfl in 16 quarterly installments of rs. 37.5 lakh each on interest free basis. the first installment will be paid by ncfl before taking over the unit.except for payment of rs. 6 crores over a period of four years, no other liabilities, be it dues of secured creditors, unsecured creditors, dues to government and its agencies would be assigned to the unit.1.3 the fixed consideration of rs. 6 crores paid by ncfl would be utilized on pro rata basis to settle the dues of the secured creditors viz., institutions and banks and the workers as per the directions of the supreme court, the view of the workers union and the financial institutions are given in annexure-ii.1.4 the entire available work force will be absorbed by ncfl within a period of six months from the date of the take over of the unit. prior to take over a tripartite agreement between workers' union, government of bihar and ncfl will be entered into. ncfl will not take over way of the past liabilities in respect of the workers. however, there would be no break in services and wages would be paid as per the prescribed norms of the industry on the date of absorption. besides from the date of the take over ncfl will also pay to the worker (as are willing to be absorbed) a monthly salary @ 50% of their last earned salary of the month when production was not terminated.the scheme provided for rehabilitation and running of the units in two phases. para 1.7 of the scheme gave details of the expenditure and tentative cost for phase i as rs. 26.15 crores. paras 1.8 and 1.9 gave details as to how this amount was to be raised and they are as follows :1.8 the total cost estimated is rs. 26.15 crores. the above requirement of funds would be financed as under:-1.9 the implementation of phase-i would be over a period of 18 months. jdbi would extend term loan (jointly or otherwise by both participating institution) provided collateral security upto rs. 10 crores is extended by ncfl and or any of their associated corporate or individuals in their private capacity. united bank of india would extend working capital as per banking norms. it would not be feasible to commence commercial production earlier as the existing boilers would need to be replaced by energy efficient boilers.3. para 1.10 gave details of the works which were to be implemented in phase ii and the capital expenditure required to be invested thereunder was rs. 478 crores which was proposed to be raised through equity contribution of rs. 188 crores and rs. 290 crores term loan from institutions. some of the other terms of the scheme which are relevant are being reproduced below :-1.14 government of bihar will write off the dues of the unit including arrears of sales-tax, water tax, cess, land revenue etc.1.15 government of bihar will take necessary action for getting past dues of bihar electricity board written off upon taking over the unit by the ncfl. government of bihar would immediately connect the power lines to grid power and ensure uninterrupted supply of power subject to technical fault. the power would be made available at commercial rates. ncfl will have to deposit fresh security deposit for electricity supply. the minimum demand charges shall be levied only after commencement of commercial production. till then only the actual energy units consumed shall be charged at the industrial rate.1.27 idbi agrees that the revival package consisting of two phases of investment is viable.1.28 united bank of india will consider grant of need based working capital on commercial terms.1.33 the existing plant and machinery shall not be removed from the site so long as the entire revival package including phase-ii is implemented and operationalized. however, the ncfl will have the option to replace the same.1.34 a committee representing government of india, government of bihar, idbi and ashok paper kamgar union would be set up for monitoring of the implementation of the above mentioned revival package.1.35 status quo will be maintained as on 18.03.1996 till the unit is taken over by ncfl. there shall not be any new postings, transfers, fresh appointment on the roll of bihar unit. all physical assets of the company should remain on as it is where it is condition. if there are any pending issues in relation to workers, the same would be kept pending and decided by the new management.1.36 the implementation of phase-i would be completed within a period of 18 months from the date of signing of agreement and taking over the possession of assets of m/s. ashok paper mills (bihar unit). implementation of phase-ii should be taken up concurrently alongwith phase-i and completed within a period of 3 years.1.37 on failure of ncfl to bring in the required investment as envisaged in phase-i and phase-ii within the stipulated time, the agreement concluded with ncfl would be liable to be cancelled and transferred assets would revert to m/s. ashok paper mills ltd.4. by the order dated 8.7.1996 the writ petition was disposed of in terms of the report submitted by government of india on 28.6.1996 which contained the aforesaid scheme. subsequent thereto, the petitioner moved i.a. no. 11 of 1996 on account of certain objections raised by idbl after hearing counsel for the parties an order was passed on 1.5.1997 directing all persons and institutions concerned to participate in the implementation of the scheme and the finance secretary, ministry of finance, government of india was directed to ensure that the legal conditions are fulfilled and the mill is rehabilitated and both phase i and phase ii of the scheme are given effect to. the petitioner moved applications for issuing some directions which were disposed of on 31.7.2000 and 1.9.2000.5. the grievance of the petitioner is that though a series of meetings had been held and attempts had been made by the petitioner, the financial institutions and the government of bihar to implement the scheme in letter and spirit, but the promoter ncfl was bent upon ousting the president of the petitioner union from the monitoring committee which was set up and a settlement was ostensibly signed with the said union. the unit was lying closed and the entire work force was without wages, except for about 200 workers who were being paid some daily wages. shri dharam godha, chairman of ncfl had sent a letter to the state government on 10.2.2001 requesting the government of india to take back possession of the unit and such conduct of his withdrawing from the scheme was in willful and deliberate defiance of the orders passed by this court. it is further averred that more than rs. 15 crores of public money was disbursed with a view to ensure that the unit is revived but the same had not been done and ncfl wanted to get away after taking advantage of the aforesaid amount.6. in response to the notice, shri s. jagadeesan, joint secretary, department of industrial policy & promotion, ministry of commerce and industry, government of india, has filed a counter affidavit. the plea taken therein is that there has been no deliberate infraction of the orders passed by this court on his part or on the part of government of india. ashok paper mills was promoted in 1958 by maharaja of darbhanga to manufacture 50 mt per day of integrated pulp and wilting and printing paper from bagasse. the company went into liquidation in 1963 as it could not fraction properly. in 1970, the government of bihar and the government of assam took over the company as a joint venture with the active participation of idbi and under this venture, units were established in assam and bihar. the company did well till 1978 but thereafter its performance slided downhill and ultimately production in both the units was suspended in 1982. the equity participation by the government of assam in apm jogighopa (assam) is 31% and the equity participation of the government of bihar in apm rameshwarnagar, darbhanga is 16%. after several efforts to revive the units failed, the company made a reference to the bifr. the state governments of assam and bihar agreed to bifurcate and nationalise their respective units and in consequence thereto the assam unit was nationalised in february, 1990. this court by its order dated 4.1.1995 had directed the secretary, industrial development to explore the possibility of the revival of the mill by privatisation, consistent with the requirement to safeguard the rights and interests of the workmen, through negotiations. it was accordingly decided that idbi would act as merchant banker for the purpose of privatisation of the unit. in response to an advertisement issued by idbi, offers were received from two firms. the negotiating committee constituted by the ministry of industry considered the proposals and finally recommended that the unit could be handed over to ncfl. accordingly, the department of industrial policy & planning submitted a scheme on 28.6.1996 which was approved by this court on 8.7.1996.7. it is further stated in the affidavit that the revival scheme had stipulated that ncfl would pay a consideration of rs. 6 crores and thereupon take over the unit without any liability and this amount was to be paid in 16 quarterly installments of rs. 37.5 lakhs each but it had paid only two installments towards the consideration money. ncfl claimed to have invested rs. 18 crores towards promoter's contribution and according to their stand a tripartite agreement between workers' union, government of bihar and ncfl had been entered into. it was claimed by them that a bipartite agreement had been entered into with ashok paper mill mazdoor panchayat which is also a recognized union. as many as 23 meetings of the monitoring committee under the chairmanship of concerned joint secretary had taken place between 16.6.1997 and 4.8.2000. idbi had already disbursed a term loan of rs. 15 crores towards phase i of the revival scheme and as per the information furnished by ashok paper mills, there had been a total investment of rs. 40.90 crores which included the aforesaid loan given by idbi and rs. 13.74 crores as share capital. shri umanath prasad singh did not participate in the meeting of the monitoring committee held on 14.7.1999 and a decision was taken in the said meeting that in view of this court's order dated 26,4.1999 he had no locus standi to participate in the meetings of the monitoring committee as he had failed to comply with the directions of this court. thereafter, he had not been invited in the subsequent meetings of the committee. vide order dated 26.4.1999 passed by this court, it was held that the agreement signed between ashok paper mills and ashok paper mill mazdoor panchayat was a valid agreement for the purpose of implementation of the scheme. it is also stated that the department of industrial policy & promotion, ministry of commerce and industry, government of india, in coordination with the department of banking was responsible for obtaining the sanction of additional term loan of rs. 11 crores from idbi and a working capital of rs. 9.25 crores from united bank of india. it is further pleaded that the department of industrial policy and promotion had been making serious efforts for the revival of the unit and as such there has been no disobedience or non-compliance of the orders passed by this court.8. shri g.s. kang, secretary, department of industries, government of bihar has also filed a counter affidavit. it is stated therein that earlier the bihar unit of ashok paper mills never functioned properly and it remained closed most of the time. under the rehabilitation scheme, government of bihar, government of assam, lic and financial institutions were to transfer their shares to ncfl at 10% of the face value. the cost of the shares was to be paid by ncfl after 12 months of taking over ownership of the factory. since there was a dispute on the date of take over and some shares of financial institutions and government of assam could not be transferred to ncfl, the cost of shares was not paid. ncfl paid the first installment of rs. 37.5 lakhs out of rs. 6 crores before the taking over of the unit. before the take over, there was a tripartite agreement between the labour organisations, government of bihar and ncfl. the main cause of dispute arose because the monitoring committee decided to transfer the ownership to ncfl before signing of the tripartite agreement. when the negotiations for tripartite agreement began, there was a dispute as to which union was to represent the labour. the industries department and the monitoring committee were of the opinion that since ashok paper kamgar union had espoused the cause and had taken lead in filing the petition before this court, they should be the one to sign the agreement. thereafter, the labour commissioner called several meetings but the petitioner ashok paper kamgar union refused to sign an agreement. when no agreement took place, ncfl sought the permission of the industries department to run the unit on the basis of the bipartite agreement which was given in view of the order passed by this court on 10.5.1997. the order passed by this court on 26.4.1997 upheld the decision of the industries department. the ncfl claims that till the tripartite agreement was signed, its ownership was not complete as the orders passed by this court envisaged a tripartite agreement and this dispute could not be resolved despite several meetings of the monitoring committee. it is further pleaded that the agreement which was entered into by the ncfl with the other union was upheld by this court and the deponent of the affidavit had not committed any contempt of the orders passed by this court.9. a counter affidavit has been filed by shri dharam godha, chairman of ncfl. it is stated therein that m/s ashok paper mills which was promoted in the year 1958 5y maharaja of darbhanga, ran into problems and went into liquidation in the year 1963. the governments of bihar and assam and idbi and other institutions took over the company as a joint venture in 1973 and the unit started functioning from 1977. since the unit had no pulping facility, no provision of captive power supply and several other infrastructural deficiencies, the plant became unviable and faced acute financial crisis and closed down in the year 1982. the average production in the aforesaid 5 years period was a meager 12.48 tones per day. ultimately, the company made a reference to the bifr in the year 1988. there was only one recognised union of the company till its closure in the year 1982, namely, ashok paper mill mazdoor panchayat which was registered in the year 1961. all the certified standing orders and agreements with the erstwhile management were signed by this union alone. the petitioner ashok paper kamgar union was registered only in the year 1978 and was never a recognised union of the mill. when the physical possession of the unit was taken over by the new promoter (hcfl) on 18.8.1997, the assets were delivered short the value whereof was approx. rs. 3.90 crores as per the inventory and list prepared at the time of handing over. the president of the petitioner union, namely, shri umadhar prasad singh and officials of government of bihar were party to the same. the shortfall of rs. 3.90 crores took place between the time the idbi prepared its report in january, 1996, the preparation of the inventory list on 25.3.1996 and taking over of physical possession on 18.7.1996 despite the orders of this court dated 18.3.1996 wherein it was directed that status quo shall be maintained. this shortfall took place as a result of theft, pilferage, damage, etc. which was caused when one shri h.p. singh was incharge of the site as acting works manager. the plant and machinery of the unit was very old dating back to the years 1973-74 and even a decade earlier and the same had been left abandoned without any care, upkeep or watch. . it is further stated that by july 1998 ncfi had invested an approximate amount of rs. 7 crores and thereupon idbi disbursed the first tranche of rs. 2 crores out of the sanctioned amount and this amount was not received by the company but was paid directly to the equipment suppliers. clause 1.8 of the approved scheme envisaged a tentative investment of rs. 26.15 crores (share capital of rs. 11.15 crores and term loan/equipment finance of rs. 15 crores) for phase i. the ncfl and its associates had already made investment of rs.20 crores as against rs. 11.15 crores as per the scheme. the idbi had granted loan of rs. 15 crores by january 2001 against which collateral security of rs. 10 crores of properties other than that of the mill had been furnished by the ncfl. the investment made in the project was many times the value of the old assets handed over to the new promoter who had put their further stake by way of a collateral security of rs. 10 crores. as per clause 1.4 of the approved scheme, prior to the take over, a tripartite agreement between the workers' union, government of bihar and the new management was required to be entered into. in spite of innumerable meetings and deliberations held by the labour commissioner, the petitioner union did not sign the said agreement. copies of the reports dated 29.1.1998 and 4.5.1998 of the labour commissioner have been filed as annexures r-2 and r-3 to the counter affidavit. in view of the reports of the labour commissioner and the order of the chief minister dated 16.3.1998, the management entered into an agreement with the sole recognized union, namely ashok paper mill mazdoor panchayat which was representing the majority of workers. the state of bihar gave its no objection to the above agreement by way of its letter dated 14.7.1998 and this court also passed an order on 26.4.1999 that the said agreement was valid for the purpose of implementation of the approved scheme. in para 35 of the counter affidavit, it is averred that in spite of clause 1.15 of the scheme stipulating the government of bihar to immediately connect the power line to grid power and ensure uninterrupted supply of power to the unit the government of bihar expressed its inability to provide requisite grid power supply for running the unit. thereafter, this court passed an order on 26.4.1999 directing the government of bihar to stand guarantee to the tune of rs. 3 crores for procurement of 4 dg sets so that the difficulty of power supply could be obviated. the offer of guarantee of the government of bihar for procuring 4 dg sets was not acceptable either to the term loan institutions or to the banks and till date no effective steps had been taken to ensure power supply. in para 37 it is averred that the entire eligible work force as directed by this court has been in full employment since june 2000 and the cost so far incurred on the payment of salary and wages amounted to approx. rs. 3 crores. the mill commenced production on 27.8.2000 but it could run only intermittently because of sabotage. under the scheme, united bank of india was to provide a working capital but the same was not done and as a stop gap arrangement the promoters managed to obtain external commercial borrowing from usa to the tune of rs. 2.5 crores to run the mill. inspection was done by the deputy director (technical) on 27.12.2000 and by a team consisting of industrial development commissioner and industry secretary, director (technical) and managing director, darbangha industrial area development authority and some others on 4.1.2001 and they found that the production was going on in the mill. the mill has more than 150 or so motors running at a time which requires constant repair, upkeep and maintenance. apart from motors, there is other equipment which also requires constant maintenance and repair. the process of repairing parts cannot be carried out at the unit itself and they are required to be sent to specialised workshops outside the mill premises and sometimes to other places. the government of bihar passed an order on 22.2.2001 whereby, an embargo was placed and it prevented movement of machineries or any part thereof from the factory premises and this resulted in running of the unit coming to a stand still. on 4.10.2001 one motor connecting the pulp machine to the paper machine got burnt. this could not be repaired at the factory site and was required to be sent to calcutta for repairs. however, it could not be sent outside on account of the embargo imposed by the government of bihar and all the efforts to send the motor for repairs failed and the management had to purchase another motor at the cost of rs. 2.4 lakhs. in paras 49 to 74 of the counter affidavit details of various orders passed by the authorities of government of bihar placing an embargo on removal of any part or machinery from the factory premises, the steps taken by ncfl to got them lifted, their eventually filing a writ petition in patna high court being cwjc no. 5201 of 2001, the representation made to the chief minister of bihar, the letter addressed by shri s. jagadeesan, chairman of the monitoring committee to the industry department, government of bihar have been given. in para 98 it is averred that out of rs. 15 crores (approx.) an amount of rs. 12 crores (approx.) was paid by idbi directly to various equipment suppliers. the idbi had also appointed a leading firm of chartered accountant namely, m/s l.b. jha & company to report directly to them. the respondent no. 1 shri dharam godha had given personal guarantees and the promoter company ncfl had also arranged collateral security of rs. 10 crores of prime properties situated at napean sea road, malabar hills and at nariman point, mumbai.10. a counter affidavit on behalf of idbi has been filed by nivedita shetty, deputy general manager of the bank. it is averred therein that the ncfl has paid only two installments of rs. 37.5 lakhs each (totalling rs. 75 lakhs) out of rs. 6 crores which was decided as consideration for taking over the company's assets and an account of said default pro rata settlement of dues of secured creditors and workers did not take place. in phase i of the scheme, major repairs and rectification work was carried out and certain capital equipment, additional waste paper pulping facility, coal handling plant, one boiler of 18th and part of the drinking equipment were acquired. on disbursement of the entire loan of rs. 15 crores by idbi by march 2001 and release of working capital by union bank of india in august 2001, the company had started the plant. it produced 2303 tonnes of paper upto january 2002 with the average daily production being around 25 tonnes as against the capacity of 60 tpd. out of envisaged installation of 4 mw captive power plant 1 mw captive power plant had become operational and a 3 mw turbine had reached the site in july, 2001. to meet a part of the cost over run which had occurred on account of procurement of additional machinery, delay in implementation of the scheme and higher pre-operative expenses, the company had approached idbi for sanction of a loan of rs. 11 crores. the above request of the company was considered and idbi and industrial investment bank of india ltd. sanctioned rs. 5.5 crores each in march and april 2002 respectively. the trial run was taken on 27.8.2000 but stopped after two days due to break down. there was intermittent working of the plant and the stoppages were reported to be attributable to shortage of fuel for running the captive power plant. the unit had started regular production in october, 2000 after release of working capital by united bank of india, work of phase ii of the plant which was estimated to cost rs. 478 crores has not commenced. a techno-economic viability study was to be conducted for phase ii and for this purpose quotations were called by idbi from some reputed consultants. the company/ncfl, however, was not willing to bear even the lowest fees approximating rs. 30 lakhs for this study and, therefore, it could not be done. the idbi had disbursed the entire loan of rs. 15 crores by 313.2001 and the delay on the part of the ncfl in acceptance of the terms and conditions of the loan, in creation of the collateral security as per the scheme and other non-compliances with condition alities of the loan resulted in late disbursement of the same. the arrangement regarding giving of guarantee by government of bihar did not work out as no bank/financial institution came forward to finance acquisition of the dg sets on payment of monthly rentals of rs. 7.50 lakhs. in para 3 of the affidavit it is stated that the company as on 31.8.2002 had incurred an amount of rs. 3644.10 lakhs for implementation of the project and the same had been made by promoter's contribution of rs. 1782.99 lakhs, ecbs of rs. 243.51 lakhs, secured creditors'/dealers' deposit of rs. 117.60 lakhs and idbi term loan of rs. 1500 lakhs. in para 8 it is averred that the operations in the plant came to a stand still from 2.4.2002 as it was hit by a devastating hailstorm in which the building and the plant and machinery had been substantially damaged. the company has filed an insurance claim of rs. 8.73 crores with the new india assurance company ltd. and the said claim is yet to be settled.11. the three respondents, namely, shri dharam godha, chairman, ncfl, shri s. jagadeesan, joint secretary, ministry of industry, government of india and shri g.s. kang, secretary, department of industry, government of bihar have stated in their respective affidavits that they tender their unconditional apology in case the court came to the conclusion that they had committed contempt of the orders passed by this court.12. according to the petitioner, the respondents have not complied with the orders passed by this court on 8.7.1996, 1.5.1997 and 31.7.2000 and, therefore, they are liable to be proceeded with. by the order dated 8.7.1996, the writ petition was disposed of in terms of the report dated 28,6,1996 submitted by government of india in consultation with various agencies. the report contained the scheme for revival of ashok paper mills ltd. and the relevant terms thereof have already been set out earlier. by the order dated 1.5.1997, i.a. no. 11 of 1996 was disposed of and a direction was issued to all persons and institutions concerned to participate in the implementation of the scheme and the finance secretary, government of india was directed to ensure that the legal conditions are fulfilled and the mill is rehabilitated and both phase i and phase ii of the scheme are given effect to. it was further directed that the arrears of the workers would be taken care of by the committee during the process of implementation. by the order dated 31.7.2000 several i.a.s were disposed of on the statements made by the counsel appearing for union of india and the monitoring committee and also the petitioner to ensure that the factory is inaugurated and the production commences. the time given to those workmen who were willing to join after giving an undertaking was extended upto 16.8.2000. it may now be examined whether there has been a compliance of the aforesaid orders or the respondents have committed wilful disobedience thereof which may require drawing up appropriate proceedings against them for having committed contempt of the orders passed by this court.13. the affidavits filed by the parties show that ashok paper mills was promoted by maharaja of darbhanga in the year 1958 but as the company could not function properly, it went into liquidation in 1963. thereafter, the government of bihar and the government of assam took over the company as a joint venture in the year 1970. the company did well till 1978 but thereafter its performance deteriorated and ultimately the production was suspended in 1982 and it was referred to bifr in 1986, the machinery and the plant were obviously very old. since the unit remained closed for a long period, its condition further deteriorated on account of lack of maintenance. any industrial undertaking having an old machinery and plant can never give optimum result even though substantial investment is made. it appears that this problem was not highlighted when this court entertained the writ petition and directed the government of india, government of bihar and the financial institutions to come out with the proposal to revive the industry. various orders were issued keeping in view the welfare of the workmen who had been thrown out of employment. but the fact remained that the machinery being very old and having been kept out of use for long number of years, it was very difficult to run the unit in an efficient manner so that it could be financially viable. the government of bihar had passed an order on 22.2.2001 directing the district magistrate, darbhanga to take necessary action and to ensure that nothing went out of the factory premises. some machines in the factory required repairs and according to the affidavit of shri dharam godha one motor got burnt on 4.10.2001. the machines and the motor were required to be sent to calcutta for repairs. however, on account of the embargo imposed by the government of bihar, the same could not be taken out of the factory. according to the management it wanted to take out scrap worth about rs. 30-40 lakhs for the purpose of sale to raise money to pay wages to the workmen. it even filed a writ petition being cwjc no. 5201 of 2001 before the patna high court praying that direction be issued to permit it to take out the iron scrap for the purpose of sale. the writ petition was disposed of on 28.6.2001 with the direction to the monitoring committee to decide the issue regarding removal of scrap for the purposes of payment of wages to the workers. the government of india also sent a letter dated 25.7.2001 to the government of bihar requesting it to revoke the direction given by it to the district magistrate on 22.2.2001. the machines installed in a big factory may break down or may need repairs and it is not always possible to repair the same within the factory premises. in such circumstances, it is quite natural to send the machines outside the factory premises or even outside the town to a big place for the purpose of repairs. however, on account of the orders issued by the government of bihar, the management was restrained from taking out the machines and this at times resulted in closure or non-functioning of the factory.14. another reason given by respondent no. 1 for improper functioning of the unit is the non-supply of power. clause 1.15 of the scheme specifically provided that the government of bihar would immediately connect the power lines to grid power and ensure uninterrupted supply of power, subject to technical fault. according to the affidavit filed by shri dharam godha, the government of bihar expressed its inability to provide requisite grid power supply for running of the unit. thereafter, an order was passed by this court on 26.4.1999 directing the government of bihar to stand guarantee to the tune of rs. 3 crores for procurement of 4 dg sets so that the unit may get uninterrupted power supply and may not be dependent upon the power supplied from the bihar state electricity board. the offer for guarantee made by the government of bihar was, however, not acceptable either to the banks or to the financial institutions and as such dg sets could not be obtained. lack of adequate power also contributed in creating serious problem in the running of the unit.15. in accordance with the orders passed by this court in the writ petition, a tripartite agreement had to be entered into between the petitioner, namely ashok paper kamgar union, government of bihar and ncfl. the material on record shows that though several meetings were held, but for some reason or the other, the agreement could not fructify and could not be signed, shri h.c. sirohi, labour commissioner, bihar, wrote a letter to the secretary, industrial development department, government of bihar on 29.1.1998 complaining that the behavior of the president of the petitioner union had been non-cooperative on many occasions. he frequently tried to create hindrances and showed no interest to reach a settlement for tri-partite agreement. he sent another letter in this connection on 4.5.1998 reiterating that shri umadhar prasad singh, president of ashok paper kamgar union was creating hurdles in arriving at a tri-partite agreement. the labour commissioner also sent a report that his department had been receiving representations from ashok paper mill mazdoor panchayat, which was the only recognised union, about their claim. after considering the report of the labour commissioner, the government of bihar gave its no objection by its letter dated 14.7.1998 and thereafter the management entered into an agreement with the aforesaid recognized union, namely, ashok paper mill mazdoor panchayat. in paras 13 and 17 of the contempt petition, it is alleged that on account of keeping out of the petitioner and its president (shri umadhar prasad singh) in the meetings of the monitoring committee and on account of their non-involvement in the opening and running of the unit, there has been a disobedience of the orders passed by this court. the material on record shows that as shri umadhar prasad singh was not cooperating and was creating hindrance in arriving at a tri-partite agreement, the labour commissioner wrote to the government of bihar for signing of the agreement with ashok paper mill mazdoor panchayat, which was a recognised union. the government of bihar also gave its consent for the same. in these circumstances, the fact that the agreement was signed only with ashok paper mill mazdoor panchayat cannot amount to wilful disobedience of the orders passed by this court.16. under the scheme which was formulated on 28.6.1996 and had been approved by this court by the order dated 8.7.1996, ncfl had to pay a fixed consideration of rs. 6 crores over a period of four years in 16 quarterly installments of rs. 37.5 lakhs each. the ncfl has no doubt defaulted in payment of the aforesaid amount as it has paid only two installments of rs. 37.5 lakhs each. the idbi has disbursed a term loan of rs. 15 crores towards phase i of the revival scheme. the department of industrial policy and promotion, ministry of commerce and industry, government of india in cooperation with department of banking was instrumental in obtaining the sanction for additional term loan of rs. 11 crores from idbi and a working capital of rs. 9.25 crores from united bank of india. therefore, so far as the idbi and the department of industrial policy and promotion, ministry of commerce and industry, government of india are concerned, they have complied with the directions issued by this court and have also taken all other steps which they were required to take for the revival of the unit. according to the affidavit filed by shri dharam godha, ncfl has invested rs. 18 crores towards promoter's contribution which was much more than the amount contemplated in phase i of the scheme. it is also averred therein that for the loan of rs. 15 crores given by idbi, security of properties situate in mumbai worth rs. 10 crores, other than that of the mill, had been furnished by ncfl. though the entire amount of consideration has not been paid by the ncfl but they claim to have made substantial investment for running of the unit.17. section 2(b) of contempt of courts act defines 'civil contempt' and it means willful disobedience to any judgment, decree, direction, order, writ or other process of a court or willful breach of undertaking given to a court. 'wilful' means an act or omission which is done voluntarily and intentionally and with the specific intent to do something the law forbids or with the specific intent to fail to do something the law requires to be done, that is to say with bad purpose either to disobey or to disregard the law. it signifies a deliberate action done with evil intent or with a bad motive or purpose. therefore, in order to constitute contempt the order of the court must be of such a nature which is capable of execution by the person charged in normal circumstances. it should not require any extra ordinary effort nor should be dependent, either wholly or in part, upon any act or omission of a third party for its compliance. this has to be judged having regard to the facts and circumstances of each case. the facts mentioned above show that none of the respondents to the petition can be held to be directly responsible if the scheme which had been formulated by government of india on 28.6.1996 and had been approved by this court by the order dated 8.7.1996 could not be implemented in letter and spirit as many factors have contributed to the same. the reasons given for non inclusion of shri umadhar prasad singh in signing of the agreement appear to be quite plausible. ncfl has undoubtedly not discharged its liability of making payment of its entire liability of rs. 6 crores. however it has come out with a case that some additional expenditure has been incurred in running the unit. it is not possible to get the complete financial picture only on the basis of the affidavits filed in the present petition. on the material on record, therefore, it is not possible to hold that the charge of having committed contempt of court on account of alleged non-compliance of the orders passed by this court on 8.7.1996, 1.5.1997 and 31.7.2000 has been established against any one of the respondents.18. the petition is accordingly dismissed and the notices issued to the respondents are discharged. it is made clear that any observation made in this order is only for the limited purpose of deciding the present contempt petition and shall not be construed as an expression of opinion on the rights and claims of the parties. the order will also not come in the way of any party in seeking to recover its dues or to establish any kind of right or taking any other action.g.p. mathur, j.19. for the reasons given in contempt petition no. 210 of 2001 in writ petition (civil) no. 174 of 1991, the present petition is dismissed.
t.s. thakur, c.j.i.1. a three-judge bench of this court has, by an order dated 21st april, 2015, referred these transfer petitions to a constitution bench to examine whether this court has the power to transfer a civil or criminal case pending in any court in the state of jammu and kashmir to a court outside that state and vice versa. out of thirteen transfer petitions placed before us, pursuant to the reference order, eleven seek transfer of civil cases from or to the state of jammu and kashmir while the remaining two seek transfer of criminal cases from the state to courts outside that state.2. the transfer petitions are opposed by the respondents, inter alia, on the ground that the provisions of section 25 of the code of civil procedure and section 406 of the code of criminal procedure, which empower this court to direct transfer of civil and criminal cases respectively from one state to the other, do not extend to the state of jammu and kashmir and cannot, therefore, be invoked to direct any such transfer. the transfer petitions are also opposed on the ground that the jammu and kashmir code of civil procedure, 1977 and the jammu and kashmir code of criminal procedure, 1989 do not contain any provision empowering the supreme court to direct transfer of any case from that state to a court outside the state or vice versa. it is also contended on behalf of the respondents that, in the absence of any provision empowering this court to direct transfer of civil or criminal cases from or to the state of jammu and kashmir, no such power can be invoked or exercised by this court. it is further urged that the provisions of article 139a of the constitution which empowers this court to transfer a case pending before one high court to itself or to another high court also has no application to the cases at hand as the constitution 42nd amendment act, 1977 which inserted the said provision itself has no application to the state of jammu and kashmir. it is argued that in the absence of any enabling provision in the code of civil and criminal procedure or in the constitution of india or the state constitution for that matter, a litigant has no right to seek transfer of a civil or a criminal case pending in the state of jammu and kashmir to a court outside the state or vice versa.3. on behalf of the petitioners, it was, on the other hand, submitted that while sections 25 of the code of civil procedure and 406 of code of criminal procedure as applicable to the rest of the country have no application to the state of jammu and kashmir, there was no specific or implied prohibition in the said two codes against the exercise of power of transfer by the supreme court under the constitution or under any other provision of the law whatsoever. it was urged that inapplicability of the central civil and/or code of criminal procedure to the state of jammu and kashmir or the absence of an enabling provision in the state code of civil and/or criminal procedure does not necessarily imply that this court cannot exercise the power of transfer, if the same is otherwise available under the provisions of the constitution. so also, the inapplicability of article 139a to the state of jammu and kashmir by reason of non-extension of the constitution 42nd amendment act to that state does not constitute a disability, leave alone, a prohibition against the exercise of the power of transfer if such power could otherwise be traced to any other source within constitutional framework.4. the code of civil procedure, 1908 and so also the code of criminal procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as "central codes") as applicable to the rest of the country specifically exclude the application thereof to the state of jammu and kashmir. this is evident from section 1 of code of civil procedure, 1908 which deals with short title, commencement and extent reads:1. short title, commencement and extent- (1) this act may be cited as the code of civil procedure, 1908. (2) it shall come into force on the first day of january, 1909. [2][(3) it extends to the whole of india except- (a) the state of jammu and kashmir: (b) the state of nagaland and the tribal areas: provided that the state government concerned may, by notification in the official gazette, extend the provisions of this code or any of them to the whole or part of the state of nagaland or such tribal areas, as the case may be, with such supplemental, incidental or consequential modifications as may be specified in the notification. explanation-in this clause, "tribal areas" means the territories which, immediately before the 21st day of january, 1972 were included in the tribal areas of assam as referred to in paragraph 20 of the sixth schedule to the constitution. (4) in relation to the amindivi islands, and the east godavari, west godavari and visakhapatnam agencies in the state of andhra pradesh and the union territory of lakshadweep, the application of this code shall be without prejudice to the application of any rule or regulation for the time being in force in such islands, agencies or such union territory, as the case may be, relating to the application of this code.(emphasis supplied)5. to the same effect is section 1 of the code of criminal procedure, 1973 which reads as under:short title extent and commencement.1. short title extent and commencement.(1) this act may be called the code of criminal procedure, 1973.(2) it extends to the whole of india except the state of jammu and kashmir: provided that the provisions of this code, other than those relating to chapters viii, x and xi thereof, shall not apply- (a) to the state of nagaland, (b) to the tribal areas, but the concerned state government may, by notification, apply such provisions or any of them to the whole or part of the state of nagaland or such tribal areas, as the case may be, with such supplemental, incidental or consequential modifications, as may be specified in the notification. explanation.-in this section, "tribal areas" means the territories which immediately before the 21st day of january, 1972, were included in the tribal areas of assam, as referred to in paragraph 20 of the sixth schedule to the constitution, other than those within the local limits of the municipality of shillong.(emphasis supplied)6. learned counsel for the respondents, in the light of the above, are perfectly justified in contending that the provisions of section 25 of the code of civil procedure, 1908 and that of section 406 of the criminal procedure, 1973 as applicable to the rest of india, cannot be invoked by any litigant seeking transfer of any case to or from the state of jammu and kashmir. it is equally true that jammu and kashmir code of civil procedure, svt. 1977 and jammu and kashmir code of criminal procedure svt. 1989 also do not have any provision empowering this court to direct transfer of any case civil or criminal from any court in the state to a court outside that state or vice versa. resort to the central or state codes of civil and criminal procedures for directing transfer of cases to or from the state is, therefore, ruled out. to that extent, therefore, the contentions urged on behalf of the respondents are well-founded and legally unexceptionable.7. the question, however, is whether independent of the provisions contained in the codes of civil and criminal procedure is there a source of power which this court can invoke for directing transfer of a case from the state of jammu and kashmir or vice versa. on behalf of the petitioners, it was contended that even when the central codes of civil and criminal procedure have no applicability to the state of jammu and kashmir and even when the state codes of civil and criminal procedure do not contain any provision empowering this court to direct transfer it does not mean that this court is helpless in making an order of transfer in appropriate case where such transfer is otherwise called for in the facts and circumstances of a given case. it was argued with considerable forensic tenacity that access to justice being a fundamental right guaranteed under article 21 of the constitution of india, any litigant whose fundamental right to access to justice is denied or jeopardised can approach this court for redress under article 32 of the constitution of india for protection and enforcement of his/her right. this court can in any such case issue appropriate directions to protect such right which protection may in appropriate cases include a direction for transfer of the case from that state to the court outside the state or vice versa. it was strenuously argued that article 142 of the constitution of india read with article 32 amply empower this court to intervene and issue suitable directions wherever such directions were considered necessary to do complete justice to the parties including justice in the matter of ensuring that litigants engaged in legal proceedings in any court within or outside the state of jammu and kashmir get a fair and reasonable opportunity to access justice by transfer of their cases to or from that state, if necessary.8. two distinct questions fall for consideration in the context of what is argued at the bar. the first involves examination of whether access to justice is indeed a fundamental right and if so, what is the sweep and content of that right, while the second is whether articles 32 and 142 of the constitution of india empower this court to issue suitable directions for transfer of cases to and from the state of jammu & kashmir in appropriate situations. both these aspects, in our view, are well-traversed by judicial pronouncements of this court as well as those of courts in england in which the courts have had an opportunity to examine the jurisprudential aspect of the right of access to justice and its correlation with the right to life. availability of article 142 of the constitution of india for directing transfer of cases in situations where such power is not stricto sensu available under an ordinary statute or the constitution has also been judicially explored by this court on several earlier occasions. we may deal with the said two aspects ad seriatim.9. the concept of 'access to justice' as an invaluable human right, also recognized in most constitutional democracies as a fundamental right, has its origin in common law as much as in the magna carta. the magna carta lays the foundation for the basic right of access to courts in the following words:no freeman shall be taken or imprisoned or disseised or outlawed or exiled or in any way ruined, nor will we go or send against him, except by the lawful judgment of his peers or by the law of the land.to no man will we sell, to no one will we deny or delay right to justice.moreover, all those aforesaid customs and liberties, the observance of which we have granted in our kingdom as far as pertains to us towards our men, shall be observed by all our kingdom, as well clergy as laymen, as far as pertains to them towards their men.wherefore, it is our will, and we firmly enjoin, that the english church be free, and the men in our kingdom have an hold all the aforesaid liberties, rights and concessions, well as peaceably, freely and quietly, fully and wholly, for themselves and their heirs, of us and our heirs, in all aspects and in all places for ever, as is aforesaid. an oath, moreover, has been taken, as well on our part as on the part of the barons, that all these conditions aforesaid shall be kept in good faith and without evil intention-given under our hand-the above named and many others being witnesses-in the meadow which is called runnymede, between windsor and staines, on the fifteenth day of june, in the seventeenth year of our reign.10. the universal declaration of rights drafted in the year 1948 gave recognition to two rights pertaining to 'access to justice' in the following words:article 8: everyone has the right to an effective remedy by the competent national tribunals for acts violating the fundamental rights granted him by the constitution or by law.article 10: everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, in the determination of his rights and obligations, and of any criminal charge against him.11. to the same effect is clause 3 of article 2 of international covenant on civil and political rights, 1966 which provides that each state party to the covenant shall undertake that every person whose rights or freedom as recognised is violated, shall have an effective remedy and to ensure that any person claiming such a remedy shall have his right thereto determined by competent judicial, administrative or legislative authorities, and the state should also ensure to develop the possibilities of judicial remedies.12. de smith's book on judicial review of administrative action (5th ed., 1995) stated the principle thus:it is a common law presumption of legislative intent that access of queen's court in respect of justiciable issues is not to be denied save by clear words in a statute.13. prof. m. cappelletti rabel a noted jurist in his book 'access to justice' (volume i) explained the importance of access to justice in the following words:the right of effective access to justice has emerged with the new social rights. indeed, it is of paramount importance among these new rights since, clearly, the enjoyment of traditional as well as new social rights presupposes mechanisms for their effective protection. such protection, moreover, is best assured by a workable remedy within the framework of the judicial system. effective access to justice can thus be seen as the most basic requirement-the most 'basic human right' - of a system which purports to guarantee legal right.14. courts in england have over the centuries post magna carta developed fundamental principles of common law which are enshrined as the basic rights of all humans. these principles were over a period of time recognised in the form of bill of rights and constitutions of various countries which acknowledged the roman maxim 'ubi jus ibi remedium' i.e. every right when it is breached must be provided with a right to a remedy. judicial pronouncements have delved and elaborated on the concept of access to justice to include among other aspects the state's obligation to make available to all its citizens the means for a just and peaceful settlement of disputes between them as to their respective legal rights. in r. v. secretary of state for home dept., ex p leech (manu/ukwa/0073/1993 : 1993 [4] all er 539) steyn lj was dealing with a prisoner who complained that correspondence with his solicitor concerning litigation in which he was involved or which he intended to launch, was being censored by the prison authorities under the prisons rules, 1964. he challenged the authority of the secretary of state to create an impediment in the free flow of communication between him and his solicitor about contemplated legal proceedings. the court held that access to justice was a basic right which could not be denied or diluted by any kind of interference or hindrance. the court said:it is a principle of our law that every citizen has a right of unimpeded access to a court. in raymond v. honey manu/ukhl/0003/1982 : 1983 ac 1 : manu/ukhl/0003/1982 : 1982 [1] alt er 756. lord wilberforce described it as a 'basic right'. even in our unwritten constitution, it ranks as a constitutional right. in raymond v. honey, lord wilberforce said that there was nothing in the prisons act, 1952 that confers power to 'interfere' with this right or to 'hinder' its exercise. lord wilberforce said that rules which did not comply with this principle would be ultra vires. lord elwyn jonesand lord russell of killowan agreed... it is true that lord wilberforce held that the rules, properly construed, were not ultra vires. but that does not affect the importance of the observations. lord bridge held that rules in question in that case were ultra vires... he went further than lord wilberforce and said that a citizen's right to unimpeded access can only be taken away by express enactment... it seems (to) us that lord wilberforce's observation ranks as the ratio decidendi of the case, and we accept that such rights can as a matter of legal principle be taken away by necessary implication.15. the legal position is no different in india. access to justice has been recognised as a valuable right by courts in this country long before the commencement of the constitution. reference in this regard may be made to re: llewelyn evans manu/mh/0065/1926manu/mh/0065/1926 : air 1926 bom 551 in which evans was arrested in aden and brought to bombay on the charge of criminal breach of trust. evan's legal adviser was denied access to meet the prisoner. the magistrate who ordered the remand held that he had no jurisdiction to grant access, notwithstanding section 40 the prisons act, 1894. the question that therefore fell for consideration was whether the right extended to the stage where the prisoner was in police custody. the high court of bombay, while referring to section 340 of the code of criminal procedure, 1898, held that the right under that provision implied that the prisoner should have a reasonable opportunity, if in custody, of getting into communication with his legal adviser for the purposes of preparing his defence. madgavkar, j., comprising the bench added that:....if the ends of justice is justice and the spirit of justice is fairness, then each side should have equal opportunity to prepare its own case and to lay its evidence fully, freely and fairly before the court. this necessarily involves preparation. such preparation is far more effective from the point of view of justice, if it is made with the aid of skilled legal advice-advice so valuable that in the gravest of criminal trials, when life or death hangs in the balance, the very state which undertakes the prosecution of the prisoner, also provides him, if poor, with such legal assistance.16. reference may also be made to p.k. tare v. emperor manu/na/0067/1942manu/na/0067/1942 : air 1943 nagpur 26. that was a case where the petitioner had participated in the quit india movement of 1942. the detention was challenged on the ground of being vitiated on account of refusal of permission by the authorities to allow them to meet their counsel to seek legal advice or approach the court in person. the state opposed that plea based on defence of india act, 1939, which, according to it, took away right of the detenu to move a habeas corpus petition under section 491 of the code of criminal procedure, 1898. rejecting the contention and relying upon the observation of lord hailsham in eshugbayi v. officer administering the govt. of nigeria, the court held that such fundamental rights, safeguarded under the constitution with elaborate and anxious care and upheld time and again by the highest tribunals of the realm in language of utmost vigour, cannot be swept away by implication or removed by some sweeping generality. justice vivian bose, giving the leading opinion of the court explained that the right to move the high court remained intact notwithstanding the defence of india act, 1939. he further held that although courts allow a great deal of latitude to the executive and presumptions in favour of the liberty of the subject are weakened, those rights do not disappear altogether. the court ruled that the attempt to keep the applicants away from the court under the guise of these rules was an abuse of the power and warranted intervention. justice bose emphasized the importance of the right of any person to apply to the court and demand that he be dealt with according to law. he said:...the right is prized in india no less highly than in england, or indeed any other part of the empire, perhaps even more highly here than elsewhere; and it is zealously guarded by the courts.17. decisions of this court too have unequivocally recognised the right of a citizen to move the court as a valuable constitutional right recognised by article 32 of the constitution as fundamental right by itself. [see in re under article 143, constitution of india [keshav singh case] (air 1965 sc 745) and l. chandra kumar v. union of india manu/sc/0261/1997manu/sc/0261/1997 : (1997) 3 scc 261].18. in hussainara khatoon v. state of bihar manu/sc/0119/1979manu/sc/0119/1979 : (1980) 1 scc 81 this court declared speedy trial as an integral and essential part of the fundamental right to life and liberty enshrined in article 21. it also pointed out that article 39a made free legal service an inalienable element of reasonable, fair and just procedure and that the right to such services was implicit in the guarantee of article 21.19. in imtiyaz ahmad v. state of uttar pradesh and ors. manu/sc/0073/2012manu/sc/0073/2012 : (2012) 2 scc 688, a two-judge bench of this court to which one of us (thakur j.) was also a party, this court examined the correctness of an interlocutory order passed by a learned single judge of the high court of allahabad, whereby, the single judge had stayed the order passed by the additional chief judicial magistrate, directing registration of a case against the respondents. since the matter had remained pending before the high court, and was not heard for a long time of over six years or so and since several other cases in different high courts in india were similarly pending in which the proceedings before the trial court had been stayed, no matter the cases involved commission of heinous offences like murder, rape, kidnapping and dacoity etc., this court enlarged the scope of the proceedings and directed the registrar generals of the high courts to furnish a report containing statistics of cases pending in the respective courts in which the proceedings had been stayed at the stage of registration of fir, and framing of charges in exercise of powers under article 226 of the constitution or section 482 or 397 of the code of criminal procedure. on the basis of the statistics so furnished by the high courts, this court held that administration of justice was facing problems of serious dimensions. this court also noticed, on the basis of the material made available by the high courts, that unduly long delay was being caused in the disposal of the cases resulting in a blatant violation of the rule of law and the right of common man to seek access to justice. emphasizing the importance of access to justice and recognizing the right as a fundamental right relatable to article 21 of the constitution of india, this court observed:........25. unduly long delay has the effect of bringing about blatant violation of the rule of law and adverse impact on the common man's access to justice. a person's access to justice is a guaranteed fundamental right under the constitution and particularly article 21. denial of the right undermines public confidence in the justice delivery system and incentivises people to look for shot cuts and other fora where they feel that injustice will be done quicker. in the long run, this also weakens the justice delivery system and poses a threat to the rule of law.26. it may not be out of place to highlight that access to justice in an egalitarian democracy must be understood to mean qualitative access to justice as well. access to justice is, therefore, much more than improving an individual's access to courts, or guaranteeing representation. it must be defined in terms of ensuring that legal and judicial outcomes are just and inequitable [see united nations development programme, access to justice-practice note (2004)]27. the present case discloses the need to reiterate that "access to justice" is vital for the rule of law, which by implication includes the right of access to an independent judiciary. it is submitted that the stay of investigation or trial for significant periods of time runs counter to the principle of rule of law, wherein the rights and aspirations of citizens are intertwined with expeditious conclusion of matters. it is further submitted that delay in conclusion of criminal matters signifies a restriction on the right of access to justice itself, thus amounting to a violation of citizen's rights under the constitution, in particular under article 21.20. the court held that rule of law, independence of judiciary and access to justice are conceptually interwoven. the court also referred to the international covenant on civil and political rights and the statute of the international criminal court. it also referred to article 47 of the charter of fundamental rights of european union, 2007 and european convention on human rights and fundamental freedom, 1950. reliance was placed upon the european court of human rights decision in delcourt v. belgium 1970 echr 1 to hold that access to justice was a valuable human and fundamental right relatable to article 21 of the constitution of india. having said that, this court issued directions for better maintenance of the rule of law and better administration of justice by the high courts. it also directed the law commission of india to undertake a study and submit its recommendations in relation to measures that need to be taken by creation of additional courts and other allied matters including rational and scientific methods for elimination of arrears to help reduce delay and speedy clearance of the backlog of cases.21. in brij mohan lal v. union of india and ors. manu/sc/0316/2012manu/sc/0316/2012 : (2012) 6 scc 502 this court declared that article 21 guarantees to the citizens the rights to expeditious and fair trial. the court observed:137. article 21 of the constitution of india takes in its sweep the right to expeditious and fair trial. even article 39a of the constitution recognises the right of citizens to equal justice and free legal aid. to put it simply, it is the constitutional duty of the government to provide the citizens of the country with such judicial infrastructure and means of access to justice so that every person is able to receive an expeditious, inexpensive and fair trial. the plea of financial limitations or constraints can hardly be justified as a valid excuse to avoid performance of the constitutional duty of the government, more particularly, when such rights are accepted as basic and fundamental to the human rights of citizens.22. in tamilnad mercantile bank shareholders welfare association v. s.c. sekar and ors. manu/sc/8375/2008manu/sc/8375/2008 : (2009) 2 scc 784, this court declared that an aggrieved person cannot be left without the remedy and that access to justice is a human right and in certain situations even a fundamental right.23. in order that the juristic content and basis of access to justice as a fundamental right is not provided only by judicial pronouncements, the commission for review of the constitution has recommended that access to justice be incorporated as an express fundamental rights as in the south african constitution, 1996. article 34 of the south african constitution reads:article 34: access to courts and tribunals and speedy justice.(1) everyone has the right to have any dispute that can be resolved by the application of law decided in a fair public hearing before a court or tribunal or forum or where appropriate, another independent and impartial court, tribunal or forum.(2) the right to access to courts shall be deemed to include right to reasonably speedy and effective justice in all matters before the courts, tribunals or other forum and the state shall take all reasonable steps to achieve that object.24. insertion of article 30a in the constitution in the following terms was accordingly proposed by the commission:30a: access to courts and tribunals and speedy justice.(1) everyone has a right to have any dispute that can be resolved by the application of law decided in a fair public hearing before an independent court or, where appropriate, another independent and impartial tribunal or forum.(2) the right to access to courts shall be deemed to include the right to reasonably speedy and effective justice in all matters before the courts, tribunals or other fora and the state shall take all reasonable steps to achieve the said object.25. the recommendation has not yet led to the incorporation of the proposed article 30a, but, that does not in the least matter, for what the proposed article may have added to the constitutional guarantees already stands acknowledged as a part of the right to life under article 21 of the constitution by judicial pronouncements of this court. the proposed incorporation of article 30a, would have simply formalised what already stands recognised by judges and jurists alike. v. krishna iyer j. has in his inimitable style explained the importance of access to justice in the following words:access to justice is basic to human rights and directive principles of state policy become ropes of sand, teasing illusion and promise of unreality, unless there is effective means for the common people to reach the court, seek remedy and enjoy the fruits of law and justice.26. to sum up: access to justice is and has been recognised as a part and parcel of right to life in india and in all civilized societies around the globe. the right is so basic and inalienable that no system of governance can possibly ignore its significance, leave alone afford to deny the same to its citizens. the magna carta, the universal declaration of rights, the international covenant on civil and political rights, 1966, the ancient roman jurisprudential maxim of "ubi jus ibi remedium', the development of fundamental principles of common law by judicial pronouncements of the courts over centuries past have all contributed to the acceptance of access to justice as a basic and inalienable human right which all civilized societies and systems recognise and enforce.27. this court has by a long line of decisions given an expansive meaning and interpretation to the word 'life' appearing in article 21 of the constitution. in maneka gandhi v. union of india manu/sc/0133/1978manu/sc/0133/1978 : (1978) 1 scc 248, this court declared that the right to life does not mean mere animal existence alone but includes every aspect that makes life meaningful and liveable, (to be checked). in sunil batra v. delhi administration manu/sc/0184/1978manu/sc/0184/1978 : (1978) 4 scc 494 the right against solitary confinement and prison torture and custodial death was declared to be a part of right to life. in charles sobhraj v. suptd. central jail manu/sc/0070/1978manu/sc/0070/1978 : (1978) 4 scc 104 the right against bar fetters was declared to be a right protected under article 21 of the constitution. in khatri ii v. state of bihar manu/sc/0518/1981manu/sc/0518/1981 : (1981) 1 scc 627, the right to free legal aid was held to be a right covered under article 21 of the constitution. in prem shankar shukla v. delhi administration manu/sc/0084/1980manu/sc/0084/1980 : (1980) 3 scc 526 the right against handcuffing was declared to be a right under article 21. so also in rudal shah v. state of bihar manu/sc/0380/1983manu/sc/0380/1983 : (1983) 4 scc 141 the right to compensation for illegal and unlawful detention was considered to be a right to life under article 21 and also under article 14. in sheela barse v. union of india manu/sc/0437/1988manu/sc/0437/1988 : (1988) 4 scc 226, this court declared speedy trial to be an essential right under article 21. in parmanand katara v. union of india manu/sc/0423/1989manu/sc/0423/1989 : (1989) 4 scc 248, right to emergency, medical aid was declared to be protected under article 21 of the constitution. in chameli singh v. state of u.p. manu/sc/0286/1996manu/sc/0286/1996 : (1996) 2 scc 549 and shantistar builders v. narayan khimalal totame manu/sc/0115/1990manu/sc/0115/1990 : (1990) 1 scc 520, right to shelter, clothing, decent environment and a decent accommodation was also held to be a part of life. in m.c. mehta v. union of india manu/sc/1007/1997manu/sc/1007/1997 : (1997) 1 scc 388, right to clean environment was held to be a right to life under article 21. in lata singh v. state of u.p. manu/sc/2960/2006manu/sc/2960/2006 : (2006) 5 scc 475, right to marriage was held to be a part of right to life under article 21 of the constitution. in suchita srivastava v. chandigarh administration manu/sc/1580/2009manu/sc/1580/2009 : (2009) 9 scc 1, right to make reproductive choices was declared as right to life. while in sukhwant singh v. state of punjab manu/sc/0866/2009manu/sc/0866/2009 : (2009) 7 scc 559 right to reputation was declared to be a facet of right to life guaranteed under article 21. in the recent constitution bench judgment decision of this court in subramanian swamy v. union of india [w.p. (crl.) no. 184 of 2014], this court held reputation to be an inherent and inseparable component of article 21.28. given the fact that pronouncements mentioned above have interpreted and understood the word "life" appearing in article 21 of the constitution on a broad spectrum of rights considered incidental and/or integral to the right to life, there is no real reason why access to justice should be considered to be falling outside the class and category of the said rights, which already stands recognised as being a part and parcel of the article 21 of the constitution of india.if "life" implies not only life in the physical sense but a bundle of rights that makes life worth living, there is no juristic or other basis for holding that denial of "access to justice" will not affect the quality of human life so as to take access to justice out of the purview of right to life guaranteed under article 21. we have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that access to justice is indeed a facet of right to life guaranteed under article 21 of the constitution. we need only add that access to justice may as well be the facet of the right guaranteed under article 14 of the constitution, which guarantees equality before law and equal protection of laws to not only citizens but non-citizens also. we say so because equality before law and equal protection of laws is not limited in its application to the realm of executive action that enforces the law. it is as much available in relation to proceedings before courts and tribunal and adjudicatory fora where law is applied and justice administered. the citizen's inability to access courts or any other adjudicatory mechanism provided for determination of rights and obligations is bound to result in denial of the guarantee contained in article 14 both in relation to equality before law as well as equal protection of laws. absence of any adjudicatory mechanism or the inadequacy of such mechanism, needless to say, is bound to prevent those looking for enforcement of their right to equality before laws and equal protection of the laws from seeking redress and thereby negate the guarantee of equality before laws or equal protection of laws and reduce it to a mere teasing illusion. article 21 of the constitution apart, access to justice can be said to be part of the guarantee contained in article 14 as well.29. what then is the sweep and content of that right is the next question that must be answered for a fuller understanding of the principle and its significance in real life situations.30. four main facets that, in our opinion, constitute the essence of access to justice are:i) the state must provide an effective adjudicatory mechanism;ii) the mechanism so provided must be reasonably accessible in terms of distance;iii) the process of adjudication must be speedy; andiv) the litigant's access to the adjudicatory process must be affordable.(i) the need for adjudicatory mechanism: one of the most fundamental requirements for providing to the citizens access to justice is to set-up an adjudicatory mechanism whether described as a court, tribunal, commission or authority or called by any other name whatsoever, where a citizen can agitate his grievance and seek adjudication of what he may perceive as a breach of his right by another citizen or by the state or any one of its instrumentalities. in order that the right of a citizen to access justice is protected, the mechanism so provided must not only be effective but must also be just, fair and objective in its approach. so also the procedure which the court, tribunal or authority may adopt for adjudication, must, in itself be just and fair and in keeping with the well recognized principles of natural justice.(ii) the mechanism must be conveniently accessible in terms of distance:the forum/mechanism so provided must, having regard to the hierarchy of courts/tribunals, be reasonably accessible in terms of distance for access to justice since so much depends upon the ability of the litigant to place his/her grievance effectively before the court/tribunal/court/competent authority to grant such a relief. (see d.k. basu v. state of west bengal (2015) 8 scc 774.(iii) the process of adjudication must be speedy."access to justice" as a constitutional value will be a mere illusion if justice is not speedy. justice delayed, it is famously said, is justice denied. if the process of administration of justice is so time consuming, laborious, indolent and frustrating for those who seek justice that it dissuades or deters them from even considering resort to that process as an option, it would tantamount to denial of not only access to justice but justice itself. in sheela barse's case (supra) this court declared speedy trial as a facet of right to life, for if the trial of a citizen goes on endlessly his right to life itself is violated. there is jurisprudentially no qualitative difference between denial of speedy trial in a criminal case, on the one hand, and civil suit, appeal or other proceedings, on the other, for ought we know that civil disputes can at times have an equally, if not, more severe impact on a citizen's life or the quality of it. access to justice would, therefore, be a constitutional value of any significance and utility only if the delivery of justice to the citizen is speedy, for otherwise, the right to access to justice is no more than a hollow slogan of no use or inspiration for the citizen. it is heartening to note that over the past six decades or so the number of courts established in the country has increased manifold in comparison to the number that existed on the day the country earned its freedom. there is today almost invariably a court of civil judge junior or senior division in every taluka and a district and sessions judge in every district. in terms of accessibility from the point of view of distance which a citizen ought to travel, we have come a long way since the time the british left the country. however, the increase in literacy, awareness, prosperity and proliferation of laws has made the process of adjudication slow and time consuming primarily on account of the over worked and under staffed judicial system, which is crying for creation of additional courts with requisite human resources and infrastructure to effectively deal with an ever increasing number of cases being filed in the courts and mounting backlog of over thirty million cases in the subordinate courts. while the states have done their bit in terms of providing the basic adjudicatory mechanisms for disposal of resolution of civil or criminal conflicts, access to justice remains a big question mark on account of delays in the completion of the process of adjudication on account of poor judge population and judge case ratio in comparison to other countries.(iv) the process of adjudication must be affordable to the disputants:access to justice will again be no more than an illusion if the adjudicatory mechanism provided is so expensive as to deter a disputant from taking resort to the same. article 39a of the constitution promotes a laudable objective of providing legal aid to needy litigants and obliges the state to make access to justice affordable for the less fortunate sections of the society. legal aid to the needy has been recognized as one of the facets of access to justice in madhav hayawadanrao hoskot v. state of maharashtra manu/sc/0119/1978manu/sc/0119/1978 : (1978) 3 scc 544 where this court observed:if a prisoner sentenced to imprisonment, is virtually unable to exercise his constitutional and statutory right of appeal, inclusive of special leave to appeal, for want of legal assistance, there is implicit in the court under article 142, read with articles 21, and 39a of the constitution, power to assign counsel for such imprisoned individual for doing complete justice. this is a necessary incident of the right of appeal conferred by the code and allowed by article 136 of the constitution. the inference is inevitable that this is a state's duty and not government's charity. equally affirmative is the implication that while legal services must be free to the beneficiary, the lawyer himself has to be reasonably remunerated for his services. surely, the profession has a public commitment to the people but mere philanthropy of its members yields short mileage in the long run. their services, especially when they are on behalf of the state, must be paid for. naturally, the state concerned must pay a reasonable sum that the court may fix when assigning counsel to the prisoner. of course, the court may judge the situation and consider from all angles whether it is necessary for the ends of justice to make available legal aid in the particular case. in every country where free legal services are given it is not done in all cases but only where public justice suffers otherwise. that discretion resides in the court.31. affordability of access to justice has been, to an extent, taken care of by the state sponsored legal aid programmes under the legal service authorities act, 1987. legal aid programmes have been providing the much needed support to the poorer sections of the society in the accessing justice in courts.32. that brings us to the second facet of the question referred to us namely whether article 32 of the constitution of india read with article 142 empowers the supreme court to direct transfer in a situation where neither the central code of civil procedure or the central code of criminal procedure empowers such transfer to/from the state of jammu and kashmir. the need for transfer of cases from one court to the other often arises in several situations which are suitably addressed by the courts competent to direct transfers in exercise of powers available to them under the code of civil procedure (cpc) or the code of criminal procedure (cr.p.c.). convenience of parties and witnesses often figures as the main reason for the courts to direct such transfers. what is significant is that while in the rest of the country the courts deal with applications for transfer of civil/criminal cases under the provisions of the code of civil procedure and the code of criminal procedure the fact that there is no such enabling provision for transfer from or to the state of jammu and kashmir does not detract from the power of a superior court to direct such transfer, if it is of the opinion that such a direction is essential to subserve the interest of justice. in other words, even if the provision empowering courts to direct transfer from one court to other were to stand deleted from the statute, the superior courts would still be competent to direct such transfer in appropriate cases so long as such courts are satisfied that denial of such a transfer would result in violation of the right to access to justice to a litigant in a given fact situation.33. now if access to justice is a facet of the right to life guaranteed under article 21 of the constitution, a violation actual or threatened of that right would justify the invocation of this court's powers under article 32 of the constitution. exercise of the power vested in the court under that article could take the form of a direction for transfer of a case from one court to the other to meet situations where the statutory provisions do not provide for such transfers. any such exercise would be legitimate, as it would prevent the violation of the fundamental right of the citizens guaranteed under article 21 of the constitution.34. that apart from article 32 even article 142 of the constitution can be invoked to direct transfer of a case from one court to the other, is also settled by a constitution bench decision of this court in union carbide corporation v. union of india manu/sc/0058/1992manu/sc/0058/1992 : (1991) 4 scc 584. one of the questions that fell for consideration in that case was whether this court could in exercise of its powers under articles 136 and 142 withdraw a case pending in the lower court and dispose of the same finally even when article 139a does not empower the court to do so. answering the question in the affirmative, this court held that the power to transfer cases is not exhausted under article 139a of the constitution. this court observed that article 139a enables the litigant to seek transfer of proceedings, if the conditions in the article are satisfied. the said article was not intended to nor does it operate to affect the wide powers available to this court under articles 136 and 142 of the constitution. the following two passages from the judgments are apposite in this regard:61. to the extent power of withdrawal and transfer of cases to the apex court is, in the opinion of the court, necessary for the purpose of effectuating the high purpose of articles 136 and 142(1), the power under article 139a must be held not to exhaust the power of withdrawal and transfer. article 139a, it is relevant to mention here, was introduced as part of the scheme of the constitution forty-second amendment. that amendment proposed to invest the supreme court with exclusive jurisdiction to determine the constitutional validity of central laws by inserting articles 131a, 139a and 144a. but articles 131a and 144a were omitted by the forty-third amendment act, 1977, leaving article 139a intact. that article enables the litigants to approach the apex court for transfer of proceedings if the conditions envisaged in that article are satisfied. article 139a was not intended, nor does it operate, to whittle down the existing wide powers under articles 136 and 142 of the constitution.35. dealing with the question whether a provision contained in an ordinary statute would affect the exercise of powers under article 142 of the constitution, this court held, that the constitutional power under article 142 was at a different level altogether and that an ordinary statute could not control the exercise of that power. speaking for the majority, venkatachaliah j., as his lordship then was, observed:the power under article 142 is at an entirely different level and of a different quality. prohibitions or limitations or provisions contained in ordinary laws cannot, ipso facto, act as prohibitions or limitations on the constitutional powers under article 142. such prohibitions or limitations in the statutes might embody and reflect the scheme of a particular law, taking into account the nature and status of the authority or the court on which conferment or power-limited in some appropriate way-is contemplated. the limitations may not necessarily reflect or be based on any fundamental considerations of public policy.....but we think that such prohibition should also be shown to be based on some underlying fundamental and general issues of public policy and not merely incidental to a particular statutory scheme or pattern. it will again be wholly incorrect to say that powers under article 142 are subject to such express statutory prohibitions. that would convey the idea that statutory provisions override a constitutional provision. perhaps, the proper way of expressing the idea is that in exercising powers under article 142 and in assessing the needs of "complete justice" of a cause or matter, the apex court will take note of the express prohibitions in any substantive provision based on some fundamental principles of public policy and regulate the exercise of its power and discretion accordingly. the proposition does not relate to the powers of the court under article 142, but only to what is or is not 'complete justice' of a cause or matter and in the ultimate analysis of the propriety of the exercise of the power. no question of lack of jurisdiction or of nullity can arise.36. in the cases at hand, there is no prohibition against use of power under article 142 to direct transfer of cases from a court in the state of jammu and kashmir to a court outside the state or vice versa. all that can be said is that there is no enabling provision because of the reasons which we have indicated earlier. the absence of an enabling provision, however, cannot be construed as a prohibition against transfer of cases to or from the state of jammu and kashmir. at any rate, a prohibition simplicitor is not enough. what is equally important is to see whether there is any fundamental principle of public policy underlying any such prohibition. no such prohibition nor any public policy can be seen in the cases at hand much less a public policy based on any fundamental principle. the extraordinary power available to this court under article 142 of the constitution can, therefore, be usefully invoked in a situation where the court is satisfied that denial of an order of transfer from or to the court in the state of jammu and kashmir will deny the citizen his/her right of access to justice. the provisions of articles 32, 136 and 142 are, therefore, wide enough to empower this court to direct such transfer in appropriate situations, no matter central code of civil and criminal procedures do not extend to the state nor do the state codes of civil and criminal procedure contain any provision that empowers this court to transfer cases. we accordingly answer the question referred to us in the affirmative.37. the transfer petitions shall now be listed before the regular bench for hearing and disposal on merits keeping in view what has been observed above.
1. the appellant (hereinafter referred to as the 'assessee') carrying the business of, inter alia, importing and exporting shawls and scarves and also trading therein. the appellant has been importing shawls and scarves from nepal. on this import, the department has held him liable for payment of additional duty (also known as countervailing duty) imposed under section 3 of the customs tariff act. in respect of the aforesaid shawls and scarves imported by it, the appellant resisted the additional duty on the ground that locally manufactured/produced goods of similar nature, namely, shawls and scarves are exempted from payment of excise duty on unbranded goods and when similar unbranded goods produced in india do not incur any liability of payment of excise duty, there is no question of payment of additional duty under section 3 of the customs tariff act. the authorities below have not accepted the submission of the appellant following the judgment of this court in vijay pratap rai mehta v. union of india manu/mh/0446/1991manu/mh/0446/1991 : 1992 (59) e.l.t. 382 (bom.) which in turn had followed m/s. khandelwal material & engineering works and anr. v. union of india and ors. manu/sc/0123/1985manu/sc/0123/1985 : (1985) 3 scc 620 : 1985 (20) e.l.t. 222 (s.c.). the judgment of this court in m/s. khandelwal material and engineering works and anr. was referred to the constitution bench of this court in the case of hyderabad industries limited v. uoi manu/sc/0352/1999manu/sc/0352/1999 : (1999) 5 scc 15 : 1999 (108) e.l.t. 321 (s.c.) and he aforesaid aspect the constitution bench has over-ruled the view taken in khandelwal's on the aforesaid aspect. the relevant portion of the said judgment reads as under:"6. counsel for the appellants rely strongly on the 'objects and reasons' of section 3 of the tariff act in support of their contention that the said section is a charging section and imposes a countervailing duty. the statement of objects and reasons says:clause 3 provides for the levy of additional duty on an imported article to counterbalance the excise duty leviable on the like article made indigenously, or on the indigenous raw materials, components or ingredients which go into the making of the like indigenous article. this provision corresponds to section 2-a of the existing act, and is necessary to safeguard the interests of the manufacturers in india.this statement lends prima facie support to the contention of the appellants but, in the absence of any ambiguity in the wording of section 3(1), we cannot treat the additional duty referred to therein as countervailing duty. nor, indeed, can we regard that provision as a charging section merely because the statement says that section 3 "provides for the levy". the statement of objects and reasons errs in being common to sub-section (1) and (3) of section 3. it is more apposite to sub-section (3) though, even there, it may not be correct to say that it is a charging provision. sub-section (3) confers power on the central government, in public interest, to levy on any imported article "such additional duty as would counterbalance the excise duty leviable on any raw materials, components and ingredients of the same nature as, or similar to those, used in the production or manufacture of such article", whether on such article, duty is leviable under sub-section (1) or not. since we are not concerned directly with sub-section (3), we will not pronounce upon its meaning and implications.7. in this view of the matter, it is unnecessary to consider the various decisions cited at the bar on the nature and connotation of 'countervailing duty'. we are unable to accept the argument of the appellants that section 3(1) of the tariff act is an independent, charging section or that, the 'additional duty' which it speaks of is not a duty of customs but is a countervailing duty."2. even on first principle, the matter is crystal clear. the purpose of additional duty, also known as countervailing duty under section 3, is to protect the domestic market from unhealthy competition. once there is no excise duty on such goods produced domestically question of levying the additional duty in the form of giving such a protection does not arise at all. we, therefore, do not agree with the view taken by the authorities below and hold that the appellant is not liable to pay any additional duty under section 3 of the act. the order of the cegat dated 8-10-2001 is accordingly set aside. the appellant shall be entitled to refund additional duty filed in accordance with law.in c.a. 8534/2003in view of the order passed in c.a. no. 7028/2002 as aforementioned, mr. rajeev virmani, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant does not press this appeal and it is accordingly dismissed as not pressed.
u.c. banerjee, j.1. the validity of the constitution (72nd amendment) act, 1992 is the core question in this writ petition and pertains to the issue of reservation. the constitution (72nd amendment) act, 1992 introduced a further sub- article 332 of the existing article 332, which the learned advocate appearing in support of the petition has contended, runs counter to the constitutional requirement of population based representation for the people and proportional reservation for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the legislative assemblies of the states. it would be convenient, however, to advert to the relevant extracts of article 332 at this juncture and the same reads as below:2. "332. reservation of seats for schedules castes and scheduled tribes in the legislative assemblies of the states.- (1) seats shall be reserved for the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes, [except the scheduled tribes in the autonomous districts of assam], in the legislative assembly of every state.(2) .....(3) the number of seats reserved for the scheduled castes or the scheduled tribes in the legislative assembly of any state under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the assembly as the population of the scheduled castes in the state or of the scheduled tribes in the state or part of the state. as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved bears to the total population of the state.(3a)......(3b) notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the re-adjustment, under article 170, takes effect on the basis of the first census after the year 2000, of the number of seats in the legislative assembly of the state of tripura, the seats which shall be reserved for the scheduled tribes in the legislative assembly, shall be, such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a proportion not less than the number, as on the date of coming into force of the constitution (seventy- second amendment) act, 1992, of members belonging to the scheduled tribes in the legislative assembly in existence on the said date bears to the total number of seats in that assembly."3. as indicated above, the sub-article (3b) stands incorporated in the constitution by the above noted act of 1992 with effect from 5th december, 1992. it is the incorporation, which stands challenged on the ground that the same negates the proportional reservation on the basis of population based representation embodied in sub-article (3) being the key factor of the constitutional scheme of democracy, social and political equality together with social and political justice, which by themselves from the basic features of the indian constitution.4. the case issue raised in the matter stands out thus to be the constitutional validity of the effort of the parliament to provide for reservation of seats for scheduled tribes in the tripura legislative assembly on a basis other than the proportion, which the population of the scheduled tribes in the state bears to the total population of the state, as would be evident from sub-article (3b) herein before noticed. it has further been contended that the newly introduced basis is the basis of the proportion which the number of members belonging to the scheduled tribes in the legislative assembly in existence on the date of commencement of the constitution amendment bears to the total number of seats in that assembly as on that date. the counter affidavit filed by respondent no.1 (union of india), however, renders a factual support to the submission of the petitioners which inter alia record that 17 out of 60 seats were reserved for scheduled tribes on the basis of their percentage in the population of the state. in addition to the 17 seats reserved for the scheduled tribes, three open seats were also held by the tribal members and having regard to this position, agreement was reached to the demand of reservation of 20 seats held by the scheduled tribes, which was, however, intended to freeze till 2000 ad. in the bye-election in june 1991, smt. bibhu devi, a scheduled tribe member of the legislative assembly holding a general seat in the tripura legislature was selected to the lok sabha and thus reducing the number of seats held by the tribals to 19 in the assembly. this enhancement thus of two seats (from 17 to 19) has been the resultant effect for bringing about a satisfactory settlement of the problems of tribals in the state of tripura and for restoring peace and harmony in the state. it is on record before this court that a memorandum of settlement on tripura commonly known as "tnv accord" was signed on 12th august, 1988 by the representatives of the central government, state government of tripura and tripura national volunteer for bringing in a satisfactory settlement of the problems of tribals in tripura and for restoration of peace and amity in the areas where the prevailing condition could not but be ascribed to be a disturbed one and the insertion of sub-article (3b) in article 332 is in implementation of the memorandum of settlement as noticed above and thus for the benefit of the people of the state without offending, as has been contended by mr. additional solicitor general, any of the constitutional safeguards far less in breach of the basic features to the indian constitutional scheme.5. while mr. gupta. learned advocate in support of the petition contended that the rationale behind the reservation of such number of seats for scs and sts cannot be doubted in order to enable the latter to have a role to play in the governance of the state but the reservation being influenced by consideration or criteria other than the proportion to the population of scs and sts in the state to be totally deleterious to the basic features of the constitution.6. for purposes of disposal of the matter, it is not necessary to go into the larger question of violation of basic features of the constitution and it would be our primary consideration to see as to whether the view of the transient nature of sub-article (3b) of article 332, its constitutional validity can be sustained. the following sub-paragraphs would detail out our views in the matter.sub-article (3b) first contains a limit which records 'until the re- adjustment, under article 170, takes effect on the basis of the first census after the year 2000' and the second part has its relevance in the number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a proportion not less than the number, as on the date of coming into force of the constitution (seventy-second amendment) act, 1992' and the third part of the sub-article of members belonging to the scheduled tribes in the legislative assembly in existence on the said date bears to the total number of seats in that assembly'. (emphasis supplied).sub-article (3b) thus stands out to be in different terms as compared to sub-article (3) since the latter provision (sub-article 3) provides for a proportional reservation in keeping with the proportion of their population in the state to the total population of the state.7. the question thus to be asked is : as to whether the provision introduced by the amendment act of 1992 (sub-article 3b), can be treated to be in insertion so as to whittle-down the provisions of sub-article (3) of article 332. in the view we have expressed it is not necessary for us to deal with the question as to whether proportionality in reservation in keeping with the proportion of the population of the reserved category in the state to the total population of the state is a basic structure of the constitution. incidentally, articles 82 and 170(3) have been taken recourse to in support of the contention of the basic structure being violated by reason of the amendment in sub-article (3b) of article 332 of the constitution. the leverage given by constitutional mandate by reason of inclusion of the words readjusted by such authority and in such manner as parliament may by law determine' (emphasis supplied depicts the intent of the parliament as to its true effect. it is an enabling provision for adjustment of seats in accordance with the need of the situation. this authorisation as contained in articles 82 and 170 stands out to be an enabling provision for incorporating sub-article (3b) under article 332. be it noted that proportionality though mainly dependent upon the basis of population but it cannot always be done with arithmetical precision and mathematical nicety. the provision incorporated 'as the parliament may by law determine' stands out to be an enabling provision to meet the exigencies of constitution. it is in this context the observation of this court in r.c. poudval v. union of india and others manu/sc/0292/1993manu/sc/0292/1993 : 1994 supp (1) scc 325 may be of some relevance and we deem it to be apposite. the constitution bench of this court in paragraph 126 stated:"an examination of the constitutional scheme would indicate that the concept of 'one person one vote' is in its very nature considerably tolerant of imbalances and departures from a very strict application and enforcement. the provision in the constitution indicating proportionality of representation is necessarily a broad, general and logical principle but not intended to be expressed with arithmetical precision. articles 332(3-a) and 333 are illustrative instances. the principle of mathematical proportionality of representation is not a declared basic requirement in each and every part of the territory of india. accommodations and adjustments, having regard to the political maturity, awareness and degree of political development in different parts of india, might supply the justification for even non-elected assemblies wholly or in part, in certain parts of the country. the differing degrees of political development and maturity of various parts of the country, may not justify standards based on mathematical accuracy. articles 371-a a special provision in respect of state of nagaland, 239-a and 240 illustrate the permissible areas and degrees of departure. the systemic deficiencies in the plenitude of the doctrine of full and effective representation has not been understood in the constitutional philosophy as derogating from the democratic principle. indeed, the argument in the case, in the perspective, is really one of violation of the equality principle rather than of the democratic principle. the inequalities in representation in the present case are an inheritance and compulsion from the past. historical considerations have justified a differential treatment."8. it may be noticed that tripura national volunteer (tnv), through their letter dated the 4th may, 1988, addressed to the governor of tripura and signed by shri bijoy kumar hrangkhawal, stated that keeping in view the solution of problems through negotiations, tnv have decided to abjure violence, give up secessionist demand and to hold negotiations for a peaceful solution of all the problems of tripura within the constitution of india. the tnv also furnished its byelaws, which conform to the laws in force. on the basis a series of discussions were held with representatives of tnv.9. as regards reservation of seats in the tripura legislative assembly for tribals, the records depict the following:"with a view to satisfy the aspirations of tribals of tripura for a greater share in the governance of the state, legislative measures will be taken including those for the enactment of the bill for the amendment of the constitution. the constitutional amendments shall provide that notwithstanding anything contained in the constitution, the number of seats in the legislative assembly of tripura reserved for scheduled tribes shall be such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a proportion not less than the number as on the date of coming into force of the constitutional amendment, of members belonging to the scheduled tribes in the existing assembly bears to the total number of seats in the existing assembly. the representation of the people act, 1950 shall also be amended to provide for reservation of 20 seats for the scheduled tribes in the assembly of tripura. however, the amendments shall not affect any representation in the existing assembly of tripura until the dissolution."10. it is on this factual backdrop, the amendment in 1992 was introduced does it violate any of the constitutional mandate? the answer, however in our view cannot but be in the negative. 'parliament may by law determine' in articles 82 and 170 ought to be attributed its proper meaning and upon consideration of the words used and meaning to be attributed thereon, we cannot plus possibly lend concurrence to the submissions in support of the petition by reason of the transient nature of the incorporation since article 332(3b) specifically refers to until the readjustment on the basis of first census after the year 2000. in our view, no exception can be taken for incorporation of such a transient provision: temporary measures shall have to be taken for social goal and for the benefit of the country as deemed expedient. the parliament is the authority to understand and appreciate the need of the situation and in its wisdom has incorporated the amendment as envisaged in article 332(3b). thus it can neither be said to be violative of nor be said to be even for infraction of any constitutional mandate. the felt need of the society of a trouble free tripura state stands out to be effected and thus need not detain us any further to come to a conclusion of its constitutional validity. it is to bring forth and continue with the object of the constitution social, economic and political justice of the people of india.11. two other contentions need a brief reference as well. the first being that to further effectuate the 72nd amendment act, amendments were also carried out by act no. 38 of 1992 in the representation of people act, 1950 by inserting in section 7 thereof, a new sub-section being sub-section (1c) wherein as many as 20 seats were reserved for the scheduled tribes in the legislative assembly of tripura. it has been contended that both the constitution (72nd amendment) act, 1992 and the amendment in the representation of people act (act no. 38 of 1992) were passed by the lok sabha as well as the rajya sabha on the same day, i.e. on 3rd december, 1992 and the presidential assent was immediately obtained thereon on the very next day, i.e., 4th december. 1992 so as to make the enforcement of both the provisions commencing from 5th december, 1992.12. admittedly, there was some hurry but whether that in any way denounce the effort on the part of the parliament to bring about a peaceful solution by implementing the accord - the answer cannot also but be in the negative. as noticed above, the social goal and social benefit ought to be the criterion for the lawmakers and having due regard to the existing situation and the impending election, the parliament has passed a legislation with expedition and obtained presidential assent thereon immediately and as such no motive neither any mala fides can be ascribed.13. the only other issue raised by way of an alternative submission to the effect that even assuming that the constitution (72nd amendment) act is valid, the provision made by act no.38 of 1992 in sub-section (1c) of section 7 of the representation of people act still ultra vires the amended article 332(3b) itself - we are, however, not inclined to go into this issue since the point has only been raised from the bar without even any mention thereof in the petition itself.14. on the wake of the aforesaid, we do not find any merit in the petition. the same is thus dismissed without, any order as to costs.
1. the appellant is originally a resident of village sawargaon, post pandhurna, district chhindwara in state of madhya pradesh. it is not disputed that as a result of state reorganization, a part of the said district being chandrapur, which was originally in the state of madhya pradesh, had gone into the state of maharashtra. earlier in the presidential scheduled tribes order issued in the year 1950 the tribe 'halba' was recognized as scheduled tribe in the district of chhindwara in the state of madhya pradesh. after reorganization, when chandrapur was included within the territory of state of maharashtra, the caste 'halba' was recognized as scheduled tribe also in the state of maharashtra. it is also not disputed that the appellant herein was brought up and educated in district of chhindwara. subsequently, he applied in response to an advertisement for selection and appointment in the maharashtra state electricity board for the post of junior engineer (civil). it is not disputed that he was selected and appointed against the non-reserved vacancy on the basis of merit in the said post. in the year 1987, the appellant was promoted to officiate as assistant engineer (civil) against a reserved vacancy on the basis of a certificate of being belonging to halba tribe issued by the competent authorities of the state of madhya pradesh. on 22nd august, 1988, respondent no. 2 herein issued him show cause notice as to why he should not be reverted from the post of assistant engineer as he was not entitled to the benefit of reservation for scheduled tribe in the state of maharashtra. the appellant submitted an explanation to the said show cause notice justifying his promotion against the reserved post. despite that explanation, the appellant was reverted from the post of assistant engineer to the post of junior engineer.2. aggrieved, the appellant filed a petitioner under article 226 of the constitution challenging the order of reversion. the high court by its judgment and order dated 23rd march, 2001 dismissed the petition on the ground that the petitioner who comes from the state of madhya pradesh though belonged to scheduled tribe 'halba' which is recognized as such in the state of maharashtra is not entitled to benefit of reservation. it is against the said judgment of the high court, the appellant is in appeal before us.3. mr. va mohta, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant, urged that the question as to whether the appellant was entitled to the benefit of reservation in the state of maharashtra ought to have been referred to the statutory committee constituted on the basis of directions issued by this court in kumari madhuri patil & anr. v. addl. commissioner, tribal development and ors. manu/sc/0022/1995manu/sc/0022/1995 : air1995sc94 , where it was directed that in course of employment if any dispute arises as regard to the benefit of reservation the matter is required to be referred to a scrutiny committee.4. it is no doubt true that a scheduled tribe notified in one state may not be given the benefits therefore in another state having regard to the plain expression "in relation to that state" in article 342 of the constitution. [see action committee on issue of caste certificate to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the state of maharashtra and anr. v. union of india and anr. manu/sc/0791/1994manu/sc/0791/1994 : (1994)5scc244 and u.p. public service commission, allahabad v. sanjay kumar singh manu/sc/0570/2003manu/sc/0570/2003 : air2003sc3626 .5. but the question which arises for consideration herein appears to have not been raised in any other case. it is not in dispute that the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes have suffered disadvantages and denied facilities for development and growth in several states. they are required protective preferences, facilities and benefits inter alia in the form of reservation, so as to enable them to compete on equal terms with the more advantageous and developed sections of the community. the question is as to whether the appellant being a scheduled tribe known as halba/halbi which stands recognized both in the state of madhya pradesh as well as in the state of maharashtra having their origin in the chhindwara region, a part of which, on states' reorganization has come to state of maharashtra, was entitled to the benefit of reservation? it is one thing to say that the expression "in relation to that state" occurring in article 342 of the constitution of india should be given an effective or proper meaning so as to exclude the possibility that a tribe which has been included as a scheduled tribe in one state after consultation with the governor for the purpose of the constitution may not get the same benefit in other state whose governor has not been consulted; but it is another thing to say that when an area dominated by members of the same tribe belonging to the same region which has been bifurcated, the members would not continue to ge the same benefit when the said tribe is recognized in both the states. in other words, the question that is required to be posed and answered would be as to whether the members of the scheduled tribe belonging to one region would continue to get the same benefits despite bifurcation thereof in terms of states' reorganization act. with a view to find out as to whether any particular area of the country was required to be given protection is a matter which requires detailed investigation having regard to the fact that both pandhurna in the district of chhindwara and the part of area of chandrapur at one point of time belonged to the same region and under the constitutional scheduled tribe order 1950 as it originally stood the tribe halba/halbi of that region may be given the same protection. in a case of this nature the degree of disadvantages of various elements which constitute the input for specification may not be totally different and the state of maharashtra even after reorganization might have agreed for inclusion of the said tribe halba/halbi as a scheduled tribe in the state of maharashtra having regard to the said fact in mind.6. here we find that the maharashtra state electricity board acting upon the direction of the state government has reverted the appellant without referring the matter to the scrutiny committee which was not the correct way to deal with the appellant's case. in fact, in such a situation the employer was required to refer the question before the scrutiny committee, which admittedly had been constituted and established for coming to the matter. we may notice that in kumari madhuri patil's case (supra) this court observed:-"the admission wrongly gained or appointment wrongly obtained on the basis of false social status certificate necessarily has the effect of depriving the genuine scheduled castes or scheduled tribes or obc candidates as enjoined in the constitution of the benefits conferred on them by the constitution. the genuine candidates are also denied admission to educational institutions or appointments to office or posts under a state for want of social status certificate. the ineligible or spurious persons who falsely gained entry resort to dilatory tactics and create hurdles in completion of the inquiries by the scrutiny committee. it is true that the applications for admission to educational institutions are generally made by a parent, since on that date many a time the student may be a minor. it is the parent or the guardian who may play fraud claiming false status certificate."similar observations have been made in director of tribal welfare v. punit giri manu/sc/0288/1995manu/sc/0288/1995 : [1995]3scr430 . this aspect of the matter has been noticed following the observations of this court in kumari madhuri patil and anr. v. addl. commissioner tribal development, thane and ors. (second) manu/sc/0670/1997manu/sc/0670/1997 : [1997]3scr1056 in punit rai v. dinesh chaudhary manu/sc/0608/2003manu/sc/0608/2003 : air2003sc4355 :-"3. as regards prayer (b) read with direction no. (iv) of the order of this court, we too appreciate the inconvenience caused due to vast area of the state. therefore, instead of one committee of three officers, these will be three scheduled tribe/caste scrutiny committees comprising of five members with quorum of three members, as suggested in para 4 of the directions, to take a decision. at pune, nasik and nagpur, six caste scrutiny committees for scs, denotified tribes, nomadic tribes, other backward classes and the special backward category in existence at mumbai, pune, nasik, aurangabad, amravati and nagpur would continue to scrutinise the certificates issued by the respective officers and take a decision in that behalf. in this regard, it is also suggested by shri dholakia, learned senior counsel for the applicant, that in case any certificate has been wrongfully refused by the certificate issuing authority, the aforestated committees also would go into the question and decide in that behalf, whether refusal was wrongful and in case it finds that the refusal was wrongful, they are at liberty to direct the authority to grant the certificate.5. with regard to prayer (d), along with the vigilance cell, one research officer/tribal development or social welfare officer would be associated in finding the social status of eligibility of the officers."7. in view of fact that the appellant's case was not referred to the appropriate committee, the judgment and order under challenge deserves to be set aside. it will be open to the maharashtra state electricity board to refer the matter to the scrutiny committee for verifying the eligibility of the appellant. we direct that the appellant shall be reinstated forthwith as assistant engineer and shall continue to hold the said post till the matter is decided by the committee. the appeal is allowed on the aforementioned terms. there shall be no order as to costs.
s.n. variava, j.1. this appeal is against a judgment dated 10th october, 2000 passed by the madhya pradesh high court.2. briefly stated the facts are as follows:the appellant entered into a contract with the 1st respondent on 9th may, 1997. this contract contained an arbitration clause which provided that arbitration was to be as per the rules of the international chamber of commerce (for short icc). on 23rd october, 1997 the 1st respondent filed a request for arbitration with icc. parties agreed that the arbitration be held in paris, france. icc has appointed a sole arbitrator.3. 1st respondent filed an application under section 9 of the arbitration and conciliation act, 1996 (hereinafter called the said act) before the iiird additional district judge, indore, m.p. against the appellant and the 2nd respondent. one of the interim reliefs sought was an order of injunction restraining these parties from alienating, transferring and/or creating third party right, disposing of, dealing with and/or selling their business assets and properties. the appellant raised the plea of maintainability of such an application. the appellant contended that part i of the said act would not apply to arbitrations where the place of arbitration is not in india. this application was dismissed by the iiird additional district judge on 1st february, 2000. it was held that the court at indore had jurisdiction and the application was maintainable. the appellant filed a writ petition before the high court of madhya pradesh, indore bench. the said writ petition has been dismissed by the impugned judgment dated 10th october, 2000.4. on behalf of the appellants, mr. sen submits that part i of the said act only applies to arbitrations where the place of arbitration is in india. he submits that if the place of arbitration is not in india then part ii of the said act would apply. he relies on sub-section (2) section 2 of the said act which provides that part i shall apply where the place of arbitration is in india. he submits that sub-section (2) of section 2 makes it clear that the provisions of part i do not apply where the place of arbitration is not in india. mr. sen points out that the said act is based on uncitral model law on international commercial arbitration. he points out that article 1(2) of uncitral model law provides that the law, except articles 8, 9, 35 and 36 of the model law, would apply only if the arbitration takes place in the territory of the state. mr. sen submits that article 9 of the uncitral model law permits a party to request a court for interim measure even if the arbitration is not in the territory of the state. he submits that whilst framing the said act the legislature has purposely not adopted article 1(2) of the uncitral model law. he submits that this clearly shows the intention of the legislature that they did not want part i to apply to arbitrations which take place outside india.5. mr. sen points out that section 2(f) of the said act defines an "international commercial arbitration". mr. sen submits that an international commercial arbitration could take place either in india or outside india. he submits that if the international commercial arbitration takes place out of india then part i of the said act would not apply. he submits that part ii of the said act applies to foreign awards.6. mr. sen fairly draws the attention of this court to sub-sections (3), (4) and (5) of section 2, which read as follows:2(3) this part shall not affect any other law for the time being in force by virtue of which certain disputes may not be submitted to arbitration.(4) this part except sub-section (1) of section 40, sections 41 and 43 shall apply to every arbitration under any other enactment for the time being in force, as if the arbitration were pursuant to an arbitration agreement and as if that other enactment were an arbitration agreement except in so far as the provisions of this part are inconsistent with that other enactment or with any rules made thereunder.(5) subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), and save in so far as is otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force or in any agreement in force between india and any other country or countries, this part shall apply to all arbitrations and to all proceedings relating thereto.mr. sen submits that sub-sections (3), (4) and (5) of section 2 would necessarily only apply to arbitration which take place in india. he submits that, therefore, even though the sub-section (4) of section 2 uses the words "every arbitration" and sub-section (5) of section 2 uses the words "all arbitrations and to all proceedings relating thereto", they must necessarily refer only to arbitrations which take place in india. he submits that otherwise there would be a conflict between sub section (2) on one hand and sub sections (4) and/or (5) on the other. mr. sen submits that if it is held that part i applies to all arbitrations i.e. even to arbitrations whose place of arbitration is not in india, then sub section (2) of section 2 would become redundant and/or otiose.7. mr. sen submits that in this matter arbitration is being held in paris i.e. out of india. he submits that to such arbitrations part i does not apply. he submits that sections 9 and 17 fall in part i. he submits that sections 9 and 17 would not apply and cannot be used in cases where the place of arbitration is not in india.8. mr. sen submits out that part ii deals with enforcement of foreign awards and makes elaborate provisions in respect thereof. he points out that in part ii there is no provision similar to sections 9 and 17. he submits that the legislature, whilst providing for foreign awards, has purposely omitted to make any provision for interim measures either by the court or by arbitral tribunal. he submits that the reason for this is obvious. he submits that in cases, where arbitrations take place outside india they would be governed by the rules of the country or the body under whose jurisdiction they are being conducted. he submits that under the icc rules of arbitration article 23 provides for interim measures. mr. sen submits that the remedy, if any, is to apply for interim relief under article 23.9. mr. sen submits that a plain reading of section 9 also makes it clear that it would not apply to arbitrations which take place outside india. he submits that section 9 provides that an application for interim measure must be made before the award is enforced in accordance with section 36. mr. sen submits that section 36 deals with enforcement of domestic awards only. mr. sen submits that provisions for enforcement of foreign awards are contained in sections 48 49 57 and 58. he submits that it is very significant that section 9 does not talk of enforcement of the award in accordance with sections 48 49 57 and 58. mr. sen submits that this also makes it clear that the provisions of part i of the said act do not apply to arbitrations which do not take place in india.10. mr. sen also relies on section 5 of the said act and submits that the underlying principle is that a judicial authority should not interfere except as provided in said act. he submits that the rational behind this is that there should be minimum interference by courts.11. mr. sen submits that the court in indore could not have entertained the application under section 9 as part i did not apply to arbitrations which take place outside india. he submits that the court in indore and the high court were wrong in rejecting the application of the appellant and in holding that the court had jurisdiction.12. mr. sen states that on this aspect there is no authority of this court. he points out that a number of high courts including the high courts at orissa, bombay, madras, delhi and calcutta have held that part i of the said act would not apply to arbitrations which take place outside india. he points out that earlier, two single judges of the delhi high court had held that part i applies to arbitrations which take place outside india. he points out that now a division bench of the delhi high court has held that part i does not apply to arbitrations which take place outside india. he submits that therefore now the only high court which has held, that part i applies to arbitrations which take place outside india, is the madhya pradesh high court, which has so held by the impugned judgment. mr. sen took us through the authority of the division bench of the delhi high court in the case of marriott international inc. v. ansal hotels ltd. reported in manu/de/0218/1999manu/de/0218/1999 : air 2000 delhi 377. he also took us through an unreported judgment of a division bench of the calcutta high court dated 27th january, 1998 in the case of keventea agro ltd. v. agram company ltd.. these authorities adopt, more or less, the same reasoning as has been canvassed by mr. sen. the delhi high court further notices that this reasoning may lead to a situation where a party may be left remedy-less and, therefore, would work hardship on a party. the delhi high court however observed as follows :" we may agree with the learned counsel for the appellant that it may, in some cases, lead to hardship to a party, however, when the language of the statute is plain and unambiguous and admits of only one meaning. the question of construction of statute arises, for the act speaks for itself even if the result is strange or surprising, unreasonable or unjust or oppression as it is not for the courts to extend the scope of the statute beyond the contemplation of the legislature. it is entirely for the legislature to look into this question."13. on the other hand mr. sundaram for the respondents has taken us through the various provisions of the said act. he has ably submitted that a conjoint reading of the provisions shows that part i is to apply to all arbitrations. he submits that unless the parties by their agreement excludes its provisions part i would also apply to all international commercial arbitrations including those that take place out of india.14. at first blush the arguments of mr. sen appear very attractive. undoubtedly sub-section (2) of section 2 states that part i is to apply where the place of arbitration is in india. undoubtedly, part ii applies to foreign awards. whilst the submissions of mr. sen are attractive one has to keep in mind the consequence which would follow if they are accepted. the result would :-a) amount to holding that the legislature has left a lacunae in the said act. there would be a lacunae as neither part i or ii would apply to arbitrations held in a country which is not a signatory to the new york convention or the geneva convention (hereinafter called a non-convention country). it would mean that there is no law, in india, governing such arbitrations.b) lead to an anomalous situation, inasmuch part i would apply to jammu and kashmir in all international commercial arbitrations but part i would not apply to the rest of india if the arbitration takes place out of india.c) lead to a conflict between sub-section (2) of section 2 on one hand and sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 2 on the other. further sub- section (2) of section 2 would also be in conflict with section 1 which provides that the act extends to the whole of india.d) leave a party remediless inasmuch as in international commercial arbitrations which take place out of india the party would not be able to apply for interim relief in india even though the properties and assets are in india. thus a party may not be able to get any interim relief at all.15. it is thus necessary to see whether the language of the said act is so plain and unambiguous as to admit of only the interpretation suggested by mr. sen. it must be borne in mind that the very object of the arbitration and conciliation act of 1996, was to establish a uniform legal framework for the fair and efficient settlement of disputes arising in international commercial arbitration. the conventional way of interpreting a statute is to seek the intention of its makers. if a statutory provision is open to more than one interpretation then the court has to choose that interpretation which represents the true intention of the legislature. this task often is not an easy one and several difficulties arise on account of variety of reasons, but at the same, it must be borne in mind that it is impossible even for the most imaginative legislature to forestall exhaustively situations and circumstances that may emerge after enacting a statute where its application may be called for. it is in such a situation the courts' duty to expound arises with a caution that the court should not try to legislate. while examining a particular provision of a statute to find out whether the jurisdiction of a court is ousted or not, the principle of universal application is that ordinarily the jurisdiction may not be ousted unless the very statutory provision explicitly indicates or even by inferential conclusion the court arrives at the same when such a conclusion is the only conclusion. notwithstanding the conventional principle that the duty of judges is to expound and not to legislate. the courts have taken the view that the judicial art of interpretation and appraisal is imbued with creativity and realism and since interpretation always implied a degree of discretion and choice, the court would adopt particularly in areas such as, constitutional adjudication dealing with social and defuse rights. courts are therefore, held as "finishers, refiners, and polishers of legislatures which gives them in a state requiring varying degrees of further processing". (see corrocraft ltd. vs. pan american airways (1968) 3 wlr 714, air 1975 sc 1951. if a language used is capable of bearing more than one construction, in selecting the true meaning, regard must be had to the consequences, resulting from adopting the alternative constructions. a construction that results in hardship, serious inconvenience, injustice, absurdity or anomaly or which leads to inconsistency or uncertainty and friction in the system which the statute purports to regulate has to be rejected and preference should be given to that construction which avoids such results. (see johnson vs. moreton (1978) 3 all. er 37 and stock vs. frank jones (tipton) ltd. 1978) 1 all. er 948. in selecting out of different interpretations the court will adopt that which is just reasonable and sensible rather than that which is none of those things, as it may be presumed that the legislature should have used the word in that interpretation which least offends our sense of justice. in shanon realites ltd. vs. sant michael (924) a.c. page 185 at page 192-193 lord shaw stated, "where words of a statute are clear, they must, of course, be followed, but in their lordships opinion where alternative constructions are equally open that alternative is to be chosen which will be consistent with the smooth working of the system which the statute purports to be regulating and that alternative is to be rejected which will introduce uncertainty, friction or confusion into the working of the system." this principle was accepted by subba rao, j. while construing section 193 of the sea customs act and in coming to the conclusion that the chief of customs authority was not an officer of custom. manu/sc/0365/1961manu/sc/0365/1961 : 1983 ecr 2163 d (sc).16. a reading of the provisions shows that the said act applies to arbitrations which are held in india between indian nationals and to international commercial arbitrations whether held in india or out of india. section 2(f) defines an international commercial arbitration. the definition makes no distinction between international commercial arbitrations held in india or outside india. an international commercial arbitration may be held in a country which is a signatory to either the new york convention or the geneva convention (hereinafter called the convention country). an international commercial arbitration may be held in a non-convention country. the said act nowhere provides that its provisions are not to apply to international commercial arbitrations which take place in a non-convention country. admittedly part ii only applies to arbitrations which take place in a convention country. mr. sen fairly admitted that part ii would not apply to an international commercial arbitration which takes place in a non-convention country. he also fairly admitted that there would be countries which are not signatories either to the new york convention or to the geneva convention. it is not possible to accept submission that the said act makes no provision for international commercial arbitrations which take place in a non-convention country.17. section 1 of the said act reads as follows:1. short title, extent and commencement.- (1) this act may be called the arbitration and conciliation act, 1996. (2) it extends to the whole of india:provided that parts i, iii and iv shall extend to the state of jammu and kashmir only in so far as they relate to international commercial arbitration or, as the case may be, international commercial conciliation.the words "this act" means the entire act. this shows that the entire act, including part i, applies to the whole of india. the fact that all parts apply to whole of india is clear from the proviso which provides that parts i, iii and iv will apply to the state of jammu and kashmir only so far as international commercial arbitrations/conciliations are concerned. significantly the proviso does not state that part i would apply to jammu and kashmir only if the place of the international commercial arbitration is in jammu and kashmir. thus if sub-section (2) of section 2 is read in the manner suggested by mr. sen there would be a conflict between section 1 and section 2(2). there would also be an anomaly inasmuch as even if an international commercial arbitration takes place outside india, part i would continue to apply in jammu and kashmir, but it would not apply to the rest of india. the legislature could not have so intended.18. section 2(a) defines "arbitration" as meaning any arbitration whether or not administered by a permanent arbitral institution. thus, this definition recognises that the arbitration could be under a body like the indian chambers of commerce or the international chamber of commerce. arbitrations under international chamber of commerce would be held, in most cases, out of india. section 2(c) provides that the term "arbitral award" would include an interim award.19. section 2(f) of the said act defines an international commercial arbitration. it reads as follows:2(f) "international commercial arbitration" means an arbitration relating to disputes arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or not, considered as commercial under the law in force in india and where at least one of the parties is -(i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, any country other than india; or(ii) a body corporate which is incorporated in any country other than india; or(iii) a company or an association or a body of individuals whose central management and control is exercised in any country other than india; or(iv) the government of a foreign country.as stated above the definition of "international commercial arbitration" makes no distinction between international commercial arbitrations which take place in india or internal commercial arbitrations which take place outside india.20. section 2(e) defines "court" as follows:2(e) "court" means the principle civil court of original jurisdiction in a district, and includes the high court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject- matter of the arbitration if the same had been the subject- matter of a suit, but does not include any civil court of a grade inferior to such principal civil court, or any court of small causes.a court is one which would otherwise have jurisdiction in respect of the subject matter. the definition does not provide that the courts in india, will not have jurisdiction if an international commercial arbitration takes place outside india. courts in india would have jurisdiction even in respect of an international commercial arbitration. as stated above an ouster of jurisdiction cannot be implied. an ouster of jurisdiction has to be express.21. now let us look at sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 2. sub-section (2) of section (2) provides that part i would apply where the place of arbitration is in india. to be immediately noted that it is not providing that part i shall not apply where the place of arbitration is not in india. it is also not providing that part i will "only" apply where the place of arbitration is in india (emphasis supplied). thus the legislature has not provided that part i is not to apply to arbitrations which take place outside india. the use of the language is significant and important. the legislature is emphasising that the provisions of part i would apply to arbitrations which take place in india, but not providing that the provisions of part i will not apply to arbitrations which take place out of india. the wording of sub-section (2) of section 2 suggests that the intention of the legislature was to make provisions of part i compulsorily applicable to an arbitration, including an international commercial arbitration, which takes place in india. parties cannot, by agreement, override or exclude the non-derivable provisions of part i in such arbitrations. by omitting to provide that part i will not apply to international commercial arbitrations which take place outside india the affect would be that part i would also apply to international commercial arbitrations held out of india. but by not specifically providing that the provisions of part i apply to international commercial arbitrations held out of india, the intention of the legislature appears to be to ally parties to provide by agreement that part i or any provision therein will not apply. thus in respect of arbitrations which take place outside india even the non-derivable provisions of part i can be excluded. such an agreement may be express or implied.22. if read in this manner there would be no conflict between section 1 and section 2(2). the words "every arbitration" in sub- section (4) of section 2 and the words "all arbitrations and all proceedings relating thereto" in sub-section (5) of section 2 are wide. sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 2 are not made subject to sub- section (2) of section 2. it is significant that sub-section (5) is made subject to sub-section (4) but not to sub-section (2). to accept mr. sen's submission would necessitate adding words in sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 2, which the legislature has purposely omitted to add viz. "subject to provision of sub-section (2)". however read in the manner set out hereinabove there would also be no conflict between sub-section (2) of section 2 and sub-sections (4) and/or (5) of section 2.23. that the legislature did not intend to exclude the applicability of part i to arbitrations, which take place outside india, is further clear from certain other provisions of the said act. sub-section (7) of section 2 reads as follows:(7) an arbitral award made under this part shall be considered as a domestic award.as is set out hereinabove the said act applies to (a) arbitrations held in india between indians (b) international commercial arbitrations. as set out hereinabove international commercial arbitrations may take place in india or outside india. outside india an international commercial arbitration may be held in a convention country or in a non-convention country. the said act however only classifies awards as "domestic awards" or "foreign awards". mr. sen admits that provisions of part ii makes it clear that "foreign awards" are only those where the arbitration takes place in a convention country. awards in arbitration proceedings which take place in a non-convention country are not considered to be "foreign awards" under the said act. they would thus not be covered by part ii. an award passed in an arbitration which takes place in india would be a "domestic award". there would thus be no need to define an award as a "domestic award" unless the intention was to cover awards which would otherwise not be covered by this definition. strictly speaking an award passed in an arbitration which takes place in a non-convention country would not be a "domestic awards". thus the necessity is to define a "domestic award" as including all awards made under part i. the definition indicates that an award made in an international commercial arbitration held in a non-convention country is also considered to be a "domestic award".24. section 5 provides that a judicial authority shall not intervene except where so provided in part i. section 8 of the said act permits a judicial authority before whom an action is brought in a matter to refer parties to arbitration. if the matters were to be taken before a judicial authority in india it would be a court as defined in section 2(e). thus if part i was to only apply to arbitrations which take place in india the term "court" would have been used in sections 5 and 8 of the said act. the legislature was aware that, in international commercial arbitrations, a matter may be taken before a judicial authority outside india. as part i was also to apply to international commercial arbitrations held outside india the term "judicial authority" has been used in sections 5 and 8.25. the beginning part of section 28 reads as follows:28. rules applicable to substance of dispute.- (1) where the place of arbitration is situate in india,-xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxxsection 28 is in part i. if part i was not to apply to an arbitration which takes place outside india there would be no necessity to specify that the rules are to apply "where the place of arbitration is situate in india". it has been held in the case of national thermal power corporation vs. singer company and others reported in manu/sc/0146/1993manu/sc/0146/1993 : [1992] 3 scr 106 that in international commercial arbitrations parties are at liberty to choose, expressly or by necessary implication, the law and the procedure to be made applicable. the procedure or the rules governing such arbitration may be of the country where the arbitration is being held or the body under whose aegis the arbitration is being held. all bodies which conduct arbitrations and all countries have rules and laws governing arbitrations. thus section 28 does not provide for rules where the place of arbitration is out of india.26. mr. sen had also submitted that part ii, which deals with enforcement of foreign awards does not contain any provision similar to section 9 or section 17. as indicated earlier mr. sen had submitted that this indicated the intention of legislature not to apply sections 9 and 17 to arbitrations, like the present, which are taking place in a foreign country. the said act is one consolidated and integrated act. general provisions applicable to all arbitrations will not be repeated in all chapters or parts. the general provisions will apply to all chapters or parts unless the statute expressly states that they are not to apply or where, in respect of a matter, there is a separate provision in a separate chapter or part. part ii deals with enforcement of foreign awards. thus sections 44 in (chapter i) and section 53 (in chapter ii) define foreign awards, as being awards covered by arbitrations under the new york convention and the geneva convention respectively. part ii then contains provisions for enforcement of "foreign awards" which necessarily would be different. for that reason special provisions for enforcement of foreign awards are made in part ii. to the extent that part ii provides a separate definition of an arbitral award and separate provisions for enforcement of foreign awards, the provisions in part i dealing with these aspects will not apply to such foreign awards. it must immediately be clarified that the arbitration not having taken place in india, all or some of the provisions of part i may also get excluded by an express or implied agreement of parties. but if not so excluded the provisions of part i will also apply to "foreign awards". the opening words of sections 45 and 54, which are in part ii, read "notwithstanding anything contained in part i". such a non-obstante clause had to be put in because the provisions of part i apply to part ii..27. mr. sen had also relied upon article 1(2) of the uncitral model law and had submitted that india has purposely not adopted this article. he had submitted that the fact that india had not provided (like in the uncitral model law) that section 9 would apply to arbitral proceedings which take place out of india indicated the intention of the legislature not to apply section 9 to such arbitrations. we are unable to accept this submission. article 1(2) of uncitral model law reads as follows :(2) the provisions of this law, except articles 8 9 35 and 36, apply only if the place of arbitration is in the territory of this state. (emphasis supplied)thus article 1(2) of uncitral model laws uses the word "only" to emphasize that the provisions of that law are to apply if the place of arbitration is in the territory of that state. significantly in section 2(2) the word "only" has been omitted. the omission of this word changes the whole complexion of the sentence. the omission of the word "only" in section 2(2) indicates that this sub-section is only an inclusive and clarificatory provision. as stated above it is not providing that provisions of part i do not apply to arbitration which take place outside india. thus there was no necessity of separately providing that section 9 would apply.28. now let us consider section 9. it reads as follows:9. interim measures, etc. by court.- a party may, before or during arbitral proceedings or at any time after the making of the arbitral award but before it is enforced in accordance with section 36, apply to a court:-(i) for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or a person of unsound mind for the purposes of arbitral proceedings; or(ii) for an interim measure of protection in respect of any of the following matters, namely:-(a) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which are the subject-matter of the arbitration agreement;(b) securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration;(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or thing which is the subject-matter of the dispute in arbitration, or as to which any question may arise therein and authorising for any of the aforesaid purposes any person to enter upon any land or building in the possession of any party, or authorising any samples to be taken or any observation to be made, or experiment to be tried, which may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of obtaining full information or evidence;(d) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver;(e) such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the court to be just and convenient,and the court shall have the same power for making orders as it has for the purpose of, and in relation to, any proceedings before it.thus under section 9 a party could apply to the court (a) before, (b) during arbitral proceedings or (c) after the making of the arbitral award but before it is enforced in accordance with section 36. the words "in accordance with section 36" can only go with the words "after the making of the arbitral award". it is clear that the words "in accordance with section 36" can have no reference to an application made "before" or "during the arbitral proceedings". thus it is clear that an application for interim measure can be made to courts in india, whether or not the arbitration takes place in india, before or during arbitral proceedings. once an award is passed, then that award itself can be executed. sections 49 and 58 provide that awards covered by part ii are deemed to be a decree of the court. thus "foreign awards" which are enforceable in india are deemed to be decrees. a domestic award has to be enforced under the provisions of civil procedure code. all that section 36 provides is that an enforcement of a domestic award is to take place after the time to make an application to set aside the award has expired or such an application has been refused. section 9 does suggest that once an award is made an application for interim measure can only be made if the award is a "domestic award" as defined in section 2(7) of the said act. thus where the legislature wanted to restrict the applicability of section 9 it has done so specifically.29. we see no substance in the submission that there would be unnecessary interference by courts in arbitral proceedings. section 5 provides that no judicial authority shall intervene except where so provided. section 9 does not permit any or all applications. it only permits applications for interim measures mentioned in clauses (i) and (ii) thereof. thus there cannot be applications under section 9 for stay of arbitral proceedings or to challenge the existence or validity of arbitration agreements or the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal. all such challenges would have to be made before the arbitral tribunal under the said act.30. mr. sen had also submitted that the term "arbitral award" includes an interim award. he had submitted that it would be open for the arbitral tribunal to pass interim awards and those interim awards could be enforced in india under part ii. however, there is a difference between an "interim award" and an "interim order". undoubtedly, the arbitral tribunal could pass an interim award. but an interim order or directions passed by the arbitral tribunal would not be enforceable in india. thus even in respect of arbitrations covered by part ii a party would be precluded from getting any interim relief. in any event, on mr. sen's interpretation, an award passed in arbitral proceedings held in a non-convention country could not be enforced. thus such a party would be left completely remediless.31. if a party cannot secure, before or during the pendency of the arbitral proceedings, an interim order in respects of items provided in section 9(i) & (ii) the result may be that the arbitration proceedings may themselves get frustrated e.g. by non appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of unsound mind or the subject matter of the arbitration agreement not being preserved. this could never have been the intention of the legislature.32. to conclude we hold that the provisions of part i would apply to all arbitrations and to all proceedings relating thereto. where such arbitration is held in india the provisions of part i would compulsory apply and parties are free to deviate only to the extent permitted by the derogable provisions of part i. in cases of international commercial arbitrations held out of india provisions of part i would apply unless the parties by agreement, express or implied, exclude all or any of its provisions. in that case the laws or rules chosen by the parties would prevail. any provision, in part i, which is contrary to or excluded by that law or rules will not apply.33. faced with this situation mr. sen submits that, in this case the parties had agreed that the arbitration be as per the rules of icc. he submits that thus by necessary implication section 9 would not apply. in our view in such cases the question would be whether section 9 gets excluded by the icc rules of arbitration. article 23 of icc rules reads as follows:conservatory and interim measures1. unless the parties have otherwise agreed, as soon as the file has been transmitted to it, the arbitral tribunal may, at the request of a party, order any interim or conservatory measure it deems appropriate. the arbitral tribunal may make the granting of any such measure subject to appropriate security being furnished by the requesting party. any such measure shall take the form of an order, giving reasons, or of an award, as the arbitral tribunal considers appropriate.2. before the file is transmitted to the arbitral tribunal, and in appropriate circumstances even thereafter, the parties may apply to any competent judicial authority for interim or conservatory measures. the application of a party to a judicial authority for such measures or for the implementation of any such measures ordered by an arbitral tribunal shall not be deemed to be an infringement or a waiver of the arbitration agreement and shall not affect the relevant powers reserved to the arbitral tribunal. any such application and any measures taken by the judicial authority must be notified without delay to the secretariat. the secretariat shall inform the arbitral tribunal thereof.34. thus article 23 of the icc rules permits parties to apply to a competent judicial authority for interim and conservatory measures. therefore, in such cases an application can be made under section 9 of the said act.35. lastly it must be stated that the said act does not appear to be a well drafted legislation. therefore the high courts of orissa, bombay, madras, delhi and calcutta cannot be faulted for interpreting it in the manner indicated above. however, in our view a proper and conjoint reading of all the provisions indicates that part i is to apply also to international commercial arbitrations which take place out of india, unless the parties by agreement, express or implied exclude it or any of its provisions. such an interpretation does not lead to any conflict between any of the provisions of the said act. on this interpretation there is no lacunae in the said act. this interpretation also does not leave a party remedyless. thus such an interpretation has to be preferred to the one adopted by the high courts of orissa, bombay, madras, delhi and calcutta. it will therefore have to be held that the contrary view taken by these high courts is not good law.36. in this view of the matter we see no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment. the appeal stands dismissed. there will be no order as to costs throughout.
1. leave granted.2. heard the learned counsel.3. the question involved in the appeal is with regard to the allotment of flat no. 3c-24, pandeypur yojana, varanasi (u.p.), to the respondent under the residential housing scheme, namely, pandeypur yojana in varanasi.4. looking at the peculiar facts of the case, we direct that in all a sum of rs. 5,15,000/- (rupees five lakhs fifteen thousand only) as full and final payment shall be made by respondent no. 1 to the appellant-authority for allotment of the aforesaid flat. it is an admitted fact that a sum of rs. 35,000/- (rupees thirty five thousand only) has been paid by respondent no. 1 to the appellant and therefore, after adjusting the amount already paid, in all a sum of rs. 5,15,000/- shall be paid by respondent no. 1 within one month from today. vacant and peaceful possession of the flat in question, after due repairs and in normal condition as per the scheme, shall be handed over to respondent no. 1 within two months from today, provided the afore-stated payment is made by the respondent.5. the appeal is disposed of accordingly. there shall be no order as to costs.6. the order passed in this appeal shall not be treated as a precedent.
s.n. variava, j.1. leave granted.2. these appeals are against the judgment dated 27th march, 2001. briefly stated the facts are as follows:-on 20th january, 2000 the election for the post of sarpanch, gram panchayat, ringnodiya, indore was held. after the counting of the votes, the appellant was orally informed that he had won the elections. however when the result was officially declared, respondent no. 1 was shown to have won. the returning officer then issued a certificate showing that respondent no. 1 had won.3. the appellant, therefore, filed an election petition before the sub-divisional officer. respondent no. 1 evaded services. by an ex-parte order the sub-divisional officer directed recounting of ballot papers. on such recounting it was found that in respect of booth no. 151 the votes polled in favour of the appellant had been erroneously shown as having been polled in favour of respondent no. 4. on a recounting of the votes it was found that the appellant had won. the sub-divisional officer, therefore, corrected the mistake by order dated 3rd february, 2000 and declared the appellant to have won the election.4. against the order of the sub-divisional officer, respondent no. 1 filed a writ petition in the high court. on 23rd february, 2000 the high court disposed of the writ petition by remanding the matter back to sub-divisional officer. the sub-divisional officer thereafter heard all parties and again passed an order to recount. on a second recount it was again found that the votes polled in favour of the appellant had been erroneously shown as having been polled in favour of respondent no. 4. thus the sub-divisional officer again corrected the results and declared the appellant as having won the elections.5. the 1st respondent again filed a writ petition before the high court. this writ petition has been allowed by the impugned judgment. in the impugned judgment, the high court was followed a decision of this court in the case of smt. ram rati v. saroj devi and ors. manu/sc/0797/1997manu/sc/0797/1997 : [1997]3scr1050 . in this decision it has been held that unless a party first applies to the returning officer for recounting of votes it is not open to the tribunal or the court to direct recounting. it was hold that an application for recounting in writing to the returning officer was an essential pre condition.6. based on this authority, the high court set aside the order of the sub-divisional officer solely on the ground that the appellant had not applied to the returning officer for recounting. the high court did not decide any other points raised in the writ petition.7. when these appeals came up before a bench of two judges of this court they had reservation about the principle laid down in ram rati's case. this matter was, therefore, directed to be placed before a three judge bench. it has accordingly been placed before us.8. in order to consider the correctness of the ratio laid down in ram rati's case it is necessary to see the provisions of the m.p. panchayat raj avam gram swaraj adhiniyam, 1993 (hereinafter called the said 'act'). section 43 of the said act empowers the state government in consultation with the state election commission to make rules for preparation of electoral rolls and conduct or all elections. section 95 further empowers the state government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the said act. section 122 provides that an election can be called in question only by a petition presented, in case of a gram panchayat, to the sub-divisional officer rule 80 reads as follows:-"80. recount of votes.- (1) after an announcement has been made by the returning officer or such other officer authorised by him, of the total number of votes polled by each candidate under sub-rule (2) of rule 77, a candidate or, in his absence, his election agent or his counting agent may apply in writing to the returning officer or such officer authorised by him, for a recount of all or any of the votes already counted, stating the grounds on which he demands such recount.(2) on such an application being made the returning officer or such other officer authorised by him shall decide the matter and may allow the application in whole or in part or may reject it in toto if it appears to him to be frivolous or unreasonable.(3) every decision of the returning officer or such other officer authorised by him, under sub-rule (2) shall be in writing and contain the reasons therefore.(4) if the returning officer or such other officer authorised by him, decides under sub-rule (2) to allow an application either in whole or in part, he shall-(a) count the ballot papers again in accordance with his decision;(b) amend the result sheet to the extent necessary after such recount; and(c) announce the amendment so made by him.(5) after the total member of votes polled by each candidate has been announced under sub-rule (2) or rule 77 or sub-rule (4) the returning officer or such other officer authorised by him shall complete and sign the result sheet and no application for a recount shall be entertained thereafter;provided tat no step under this sub-rule shall be taken on the completion of the counting until the candidates and election agents present at the completion thereof have been given a reasonable opportunity to exercise the right conferred by sub-rule (1).6. the counted ballot papers shall be bundles and kept in the manner mentioned in sub-rule (3) of rule 77.7. result sheets in form 16, 17, 18 and 19 for panch, sarpanch, member of janpad panchayat and member or zila panchayat respectively, prepared by such other officers as are authorised by the returning officer, shall be submitted by them, in separates envelops to the returning officer for compilation and tabulation or votes polled by each candidate.8. the returning officer on receipt or result sheets under sub-rule (7) shall enter of cause to be entered the total number of votes polled by each candidate contesting for a seat of sarpanch, member of janpad panchayat or member of zila panchayat at each polling station of the concerned constituency in subsequent part of parts of form 17, 18 and 19 respectively and complete and sign the result sheet."9. thus under sub-rule (5) once the result sheet is completed and signed, no application for recount can be entertained.10. rule 81, also provides that after the counting of the votes, the returning officer shall prepare a return and declare the candidate who has the largest number of votes to have been elected. under rule 83, a certificate is to be granted to the returned candidate who has been declared elected. under rule 84 after the certificate has been granted, the election officer or the returning officer can only correct clerical or arithmetical mistakes.11. thus after declaration of results, the returning officer has no power either to direct recount or to change the results of the election. once the result is declared, the only remedy of an aggrieved party is an election petition under section 122.12. in the case, as stated above, the appellant had been orally told that he had won. he only came to know that respondent no. 1 had been declared elected after the result was declared. at this stage, he could not have approached the returning officer for recount. the only remedy, therefore, available to the appellant was to file an election petition.13. in view of section 122 and the rules, we are unable to agree with the ratio laid down in ram rati's case. it is not correct to hold that, in an election petition, after the declaration of the result, the court or tribunal cannot direct recounting of votes. there is no prohibition in the act or under the rules prohibiting the court or tribunal to direct a recounting of the votes. even otherwise a party may not know that the recounting is necessary till after result is declared. at this stage, it would not be possible for him to apply for recounting to the returning officer. his only remedy would be to file an election petition under section 122. in such a case, the court or the tribunal is bound to consider the plea and where case is made out, it may direct recount depending upon the evidence led by the parties. in the present case, there was obvious error in declaring the result. we, therefore, hold that the ratio laid down in ram rati's case is not correct.14. in his view of the matter, the decision of the high court cannot be sustained and is, therefore, set aside. as the writ petition was disposed off only on the basis of ram rati's case, the high court has not dealt with other points raised in the writ petition. we therefore restore the writ petition to the file of the high court. the high court shall decide the same on merits.15. the appeals stand disposed of accordingly. there shall be no order as to costs.
