$$$ j. it is regrettable that in spite of being cautid times by this court not to challenge election of the president of india in a cavalier and light hearted manner the petitir who is an advocate has filed the present election petition challenging the election of dr. a.p.j. $$$ respondent no. as president of india on the same similar grounds of challenge which stand concluded against him in petitir 's own cases by several decisions of this court. our regret is compounded by the fact that petitir is an advocate. he does we presume know the value of earlier binding precedents declaring the law by the highest court of the land. this judgment shall dispose of election petition no. of and special leave petition no. of. the facts are being stated from the election petition which covers and takes care of the points raised in the special leave petition as well. $$$ has challenged the election of respondent no. of the office of the president of india which was held in pursuance to the notification dated th june published by the returning officer shri r.c. tripathi secretary general $$$. the said election was conducted under the provisions of presidential and vice -presidential elections act hereinafter referred to as the act and the presidential and vice -presidential election rules hereinafter referred to as the rules. in all nomination papers were filed within the time prescribed. respondent no. was nominated by the ruling national democratic alliance and its allies and the main opposition party i.the indian national congress(i and its allies whereas captain $$$ respondent no. was sponsored and nominated by $$$ and its allied parties. scrutiny of the nomination papers in connection with the presidential election was conducted on th of june by the returning officer. nomination papers of all candidates other than respondent no. & were rejected. nomination paper of the petitir was rejected on the ground that the same was not accompanied by a certified copy of the entry relating to the candidate in the electoral roll and that the requirements of law were incomplete for want of proposers and ers. $$$ had filed his writ objections to the sets of nomination papers filed by respondent no. which were duly considered and rejected being without any substance. the poll for the contest between respondent no. & took place on th july. respondent no. was declared elected as the president of india having received majority of votes. the result of the said election was declared in extraordinary gazette of india of th july declaring dr. a.p.j. $$$ respondent no. as elected to the office of the president of india. respondent no. took oath of the office of the president of india on th july. on 0th of july petitir filed c.w.p. no. of under article of the constitution of india in the high court of judicature at new delhi challenging the rejection of his nomination paper and the acceptance of the nomination papers of respondent nos. & herein and the constitutional validity of various provisions of the act and the rules and section of the representation of peoples act being violative of $$$ and of the constitution of india. the said writ petition was dismissed by a division bench of the high court of delhi by a detailed order on th july. special leave petition civil no. of arises from the said decision of the high court of delhi. the election petition no. of has been filed seeking a declaration that the result of the election declaring respondent no. as the duly elected president of india be declared void for illegal rejection of the nomination paper of the petitir and the illegal acceptance of the nomination paper of the respondent no. the various provisions of the act and the rules being ultra vires the constitution of india to which the challenge was laid before the high court in the writ petition has been laid in the election petitions as well. part ii of the act sections to contains provisions relating to the conduct of president and vice -presidential elections. section provides that the election commission for the purpose of each election of the president and vice -president shall in consultation with the central government appoint a returning officer having his office in new delhi and may also appoint or more assistant returning officer. under section the election commission by notification is to issue the election programme prescribing the last date for filing the nominations the date for scrutiny of nominations last date of the withdrawal of candidature and the date on which a poll shall if necessary take place. section provides for giving of a public notice of election by the returning officer after the issuance of the notification under sub -section of section. section a prescribes that any person may be nominated for election to the office of president or vice -president if he is qualified to be elected to that office under the constitution. section b provides for presentation of nomination papers and lays down the requirement for a valid nomination. sub -section of section requires that nomination papers completed in the prescribed form must be subscribed by candidate as assenting to the nomination. in clause a of section as it stood prior to.prescribed that in case of presidential election the nomination papers shall also be subscribed by at least electors as proposers and at least electors as ers. section lays down that each nomination paper shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the entry relating to the candidate in the electoral roll for the parliamentary constituency in which the candidate is registered as an elector. any nomination paper which is not accompanied by the certified copy is required to be rejected under section. section c prior to.prescribed that a candidate shall not be deemed to be duly nominated for election unless he deposits or causes to be deposited a sum of rupees. section e makes provisions for scrutiny of nomination papers by the returning officer ground c of section provides for rejection of a nomination paper if it is not subscribed by the required number of proposers or ers and ground provides for rejection of the nomination papers on the ground of failure to comply with any of the provisions of section or section c. section lays down the procedure in contested and uncontested elections. section provides for manner of voting at the elections and section deals with counting of votes. section provides for declaration of results on the completion of counting of votes. by act in clause a of section instead of proposers and ers provisions have been made that in the case of election of the office of president there should be at least electors as proposers and at least electors as ers. in section c the deposit amount was increased from rs. to rs.. part iii of the act section to contains provisions relating to disputes regarding elections. section defines candidate to mean a person who has been or claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate at an election. section provides that no election shall be called in question except by presenting an election petition to the authority specified in sub -section. this court has been specified as the authority to try the election petition. sub -section of section lays down that an election petition can either be presented by any candidate at such election or in the case of presidential election by or more electors joined together as petitirs. section prescribes the grounds on which the election of a returned candidate can be declared to be void. clause c of section with which we are concerned provides that the election can be declared to be void if the nomination of a candidate has been wrongly rejected or the nomination of the successful candidate has been wrongly accepted. we did not deem it necessary to issue notice in these petitions as the points raised in the election petition as well as in the special leave petition already stand concluded by the previous judgment of this court. section of the act provides that no election shall be called in question except by presenting an election petition to the authority specified in sub -section. sub -section specifies that the supreme court of india shall have the jurisdiction to try an election petition. sub -section provides that every election petition shall be presented to such authority in accordance with the provisions of this part and of the rules made by the supreme court under article. part vii order xxxix of the rules made by this court known as supreme court rules contains rules relating to election petition filed under part iii of section of the act. rules of the order xxxix lays down that an application calling in question an election shall only be by a petition made and presented in accordance with the provisions of this order. rules provides that subject to the provisions of this order or any special order or directions of the court the procedure in an election petition shall follow as nearly as may be the procedure in proceedings before the court in the exercise of this original jurisdiction. thus the procedure contained in part iii of the rules of this court including order xxiii relating to the institution of suits by plaints applies to the proceedings commenced by election petitions after reading the word petition for plaint. rule of these rules provides that this court after the plaint has been presented to the registrar and numbered shall rejected the plaint where it does not disclose a cause of action or where the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law. since the points raised in this petition stand concluded by the previous judgments of this court we have not deemed it necessary to issue notice and dispose of the petition at the preliminary stage. the points which arise for consideration before us are:( does the petitir have a locus standi to maintain his election petition or in other words is he duly nominated candidate in accordance with provisions of sections and c of the presidential and vice presidential elections act?( has the petition put a valid challenge to the validity of sections and c of the act or any other provisions of the act and the rules?( is the petition maintainable?. article of the constitution of india provides that the president shall be elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the elected members of both houses of parliament and the elected members of the legislative assemblies of the states. the manner of election of the president is based on proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote by secret ballot. article lays down as follows:". matters relating to or connected with the election of a president or vice -president.-all doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with the election of a president or vice -president shall be inquired into and decided by the supreme court whose decision shall be final.if the election of a person as president or vice -president is declared void by the supreme court acts d by him in the exercise and performance of the powers and duties of the office of president or vice -president as the case may be on or before the date of the decision of the supreme court shall not be invalidated by reason of that declaration.subject to the provisions of this constitution parliament may be law regulate any matter relating to or connected with the election of a president or vice -president.the election of a person as president or vice -president shall not be called in question on the ground of the exisce of any vacancy for whatever reason among the members of the electoral college electing him. to carry out the purpose of article of the constitution of india the presidential and vice -presidential election act was enacted by parliament. the grounds on which the election can be questid as well as the mode of questioning it were laid down by the act. section of the act provides an election petition calling in question an election may be presented on or more of the grounds specified in sub -section of section and section to the supreme court by any candidate at such election or in the case of presidential election by or more electors joined as petitirs. section of the act defines the candidate to mean a person who has been or claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate at an election. the petitir admits in his petition that he was not duly nominated as per requirement of the provisions of section of the act which provides that each candidate shall..deliver to the returning officer at the placed specified in this benefit in the public notice issued under section a nomination paper completed in the prescribed form and subscribed by the candidate as assenting to the nomination and(a in the case of presidential election also by at least electors as proposers and at least electors as ers;(b in the case of vice -presidential election also by at least electors as proposers and at least electors as ers provided that no nomination paper shall be presented to the returning officer on $$$$ which is a public holiday.x. again section c provides that:"c. a candidate shall not be deemed to be duly nominated for election unless he deposits or causes to be deposited a sum of rupees;provided that where a candidate has been nominated by more than nomination paper for the same election not more than deposit shall be required of him under this sub -section. nomination paper of the petitir was rejected on the ground that it was proposed and ed by the requisite numbers of proposers and ers. this point was examined exhaustively by this court in the case of very petitir now before us against the former president $$$ reddy charan $$$ v. neelam sanjeeva reddy manu / sc/00/78manu / sc/00/78 and it was held that:"the result of a careful consideration by us of the provisions mentid above is that we think that the procedure or manner for questioning the presidential election having been laid down the petitir must come within the corners of that procedure in order to have a locus standi to challenge the presidential election and to be able to maintain this petition. if he neither is nor can claim to be a candidate on assertions made by him in his petition itself he would be lacking the right to question the election of shri neelam sanjeeva reddy as presidential of india. the effect of the provisions of sections and and of the act read with order xxxix rules and of the rules of this court is that the petition before us is barred because the petitir has not got the required locus standi to maintain it. again in $$$ sahu v. giani zail singh manu / sc/0/83manu / sc/0/83 the point raised by the petitir on the limb of section of the act defining the candidate to mean claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate was rejected. $$$ the said contion this court observed:"the petitirs however cond that even if it is held that they were not duly nominated as candidates their petitions can not be dismissed on that ground since they claim to have been duly nominated. it is true that in the matter of claim to candidacy a person who claims to have been duly nominated is on par with a person who in fact was duly nominated. but the claim to have been duly nominated can not be made by a person whose nomination paper does not comply with the mandatory requirements of section of the act. that is to say a person whose nomination paper admittedly was not subscribed by the requisite number of electors as proposers and seconders can not claim that he was duly nominated. such a claim can only be made by a person who can show that his nomination paper conformed to the provisions of section and yet it was rejected that is wrongly rejected by the returning officer. to illustrate if the returning officer rejects a nomination paper on the ground that of the subscribes who had proposed the nomination is not an elector the petitir can claim to have been duly nominated if he proves that the said proposer was in fact an elector.thus the occasion for a person to make a claim that he was duly nominated can arise only if his nomination paper complies with the statutory requirement which govern the filing of nomination papers and not otherwise. the claim that he was duly nominated necessarily implies and involves the claim that his nomination paper conformed to the requirements of the statute. therefore a contestant whose nomination paper is not subscribed by at least electors as proposers and electors as seconders as required by section of the act can not claim to have been duly nominated any more than a contestant who had not subscribed his assents to his own nomination can. the claim of a contestant that he was duly nominated must arise out of his compliance with the provisions of the act. it can not arise out of the violation of the act. otherwise a person who had not filed nay nomination paper at all but who had only informed the returning officer orally that he desired to contest the election could also cond that he claims to have been duly nominated as a candidate. the question regarding locus standi was examined for the time in the election petition filed by the petitioner in $$$ sahu v. k.r. narayanan and ors.manu / sc/0877/998manu / sc/0877/998 $$$ it was again reiterated that:"in view of the decisions referred to above it must be held that neither of the petitioners was a candidate as the said expression is defined in section of the act since neither of them had been duly nominated nor could he claim to have been nominated as a candidate inasmuch as the nomination papers filed by both of them did not comply with the mandatory requirements of section of the act and the nomination paper of $$$ was filed without complying with the requirements of section of the act. on that view it must be held that neither of the petitioners has the locus standi to maintain the petition. in view of the authoritative pronouncements of this court the petitioner can not be regarded as a person who had been nominated or can claim to have duly nominated as candidate at the election in question. his nomination papers were thus rightly rejected by the returning officer and the petition on his behalf is therefore not maintainable. question regarding the constitutional validity of sections and c before its amendment by act no. of which provided that there should be at least electors as proposers and electors as seconders was examined in fakruddin ali ahmed 's case supra and neelam sanjeeva reddy 's case supra. the validity of these sections as they existed then was upheld. the validity of amending act no. of amending sections and c providing for at least electors as proposers and seconders instead of proposers and seconders as provided prior to the amendment was questioned in k.r. narayanan case supra. the same was rejected and these provisions were held to be intra vires. it was held:"as regards the submission urged on behalf of the petitioners regarding the validity of the provisions of sections and c as they stood prior to --it may be stated that the validity of the said provisions has been upheld by this court in $$$ sahu v. $$$ / $$$ / sc/0/97 air975sc8 $$$ v. s. neelam sanjeeva reddy and $$$ sahu v. giani zail singh. $$$ was a party to all these decisions. the challenge to the validity of the amendments introduced by the $$$ and the amendment act has been negatived by this court in the writ petitions referred to above out of which were field by $$$. the petitioners have urged that in this petition the challenge to the validity of section is based on the ground that it violates the principle of secrecy of ballot incorporated in article of the constitution and that this ground has not been considered in the earlier decisions. we do not find any merit in this contion. the requirement in section about the nomination paper being subscribed by a particular number of electors as proposers and seconders does not in any way involve the infringement of the secrecy of ballot at the election inasmuch as the elector who has subscribed the nomination paper of a person as a proposer or as a seconder is free to cast his vote in favour of any candidate and is not bound to vote for the person whose nomination paper he has subscribed as a proposer or seconder. the identity of the candidate in whose favour he has cast his vote is not be disclosed. the contion on the question as to whether there was a conflict between $$$ and of the constitution of india was also rejected in neelam sanjeeva reddy 's case supra by observing thus:"it is clear to us that article only provides the qualifications or conditions for the eligibility of a candidate. it has nothing to do with the nomination of a candidate which requires proposers and seconders. we think that in the case of an election to such a high office as that of the president of india it is quite reasonable to lay down the condition that a person who is allowed to contest the election as a candidate must have at least proposers and seconders from amongst of electors who are legislators. we think that the subject -matter of section 5b and 5c is completely covered by the provisions of article of the constitution set out above. we also think that there is no force in the contention that sections 5b and 5c of the act are in conflict with article of the constitution. the conditions laid down in sections and 5c apply to all persons who want to be candidates at a presidential election without any discrimination. they prima facie imposed reasonable conditions to be observed by any person who wants seriously to contest at a presidential election. hence this provision would be valid even apart from article of the constitution. every conceivable challenge of these provisions has already been upheld by this court in the aforesaid judgments in the petitioner 's own case and in mithilesh kumar sinha v. returning officer for presidential election suppl. scc. we need not examine these points any further in view of the consistent view of this court with which we respectfully agree. another contention which just needs to be noticed and rejected is regarding the validity of the procedure prescribed under the act and the rules for holding the election of the president and vice -president or its being ultra vires the constitution of india. the procedure laid under the act and the rules has already been upheld in the judgments already referred to. objections to the validity of the nomination paper filed by respondent no. which was rejected by the returning officer are so frivolous that they do not require attention of this court. in our opinion returning officer rightly overruled the objections filed by the petitioner questioning the validity of the nomination paper filed by respondent no.. before we conclude we would like to advert to an aspect which was specifically pointed out by this court in k.r. narayanan 's case supra which can not be ignored rather needs to be highlighted again. it was observed that before filing the said election petition the petitioner had earlier filed election petitions challenging the election of the returned candidates in the presidential elections held in the year and. all these election petitions were dismissed on the grounds that the petitioner had not locus standi to maintain the election petition. this court in k.r. narayanan 's case supra after referring to the observations made in the earlier judgments that frivolous election petitions on the same very ground should not be filed while dismissing the petition imposed the cost of rs. coming down heavily against the filing of such frivolous election petitions it was observed:"we find that these observations have had no effect. this election petition which has been jointly filed by the petitioners shows no improvement. it suffers from the same defects as the earlier petitions filed by the petitioners. it seems that the petitioners are obsessed with a desire that they should find a place in some book of records. they find the temptation to file an election petition after the presidential election too difficult to resist. it is a matter of regret that petitioner who happens to be an advocate himself has been persisting in his pastime knowing well that such conduct on his part amounts to an abuse of the process of law. this court has so far refrained from imposing costs in the election petitions that were filed by the petitioners earlier. it is high time that the petitioners who have persisted in filing this petition in spite of the law laid down authoritatively by this court in the earlier decisions are saddled with costs. it seems that the petitioners although an advocate has not learnt any lesson from the observations made by this court in the earlier judgments and that is why we have begun the judgment with the observation that such a conduct on the part of the petitioner who happens to be an advocate is regrettable. we hope he does not do so again. for the reasons stated above we do not find any merit either in the election petition or in the special leave petition against the judgment of the high court of delhi and dismiss them with costs which are assessed on rs. in each case. the costs so deposited shall be transferred to the supreme court legal services committee. it is also directed that no petition filed by the petitioner -in -person shall be entertained in this court till the amount of costs imposed is deposited.