u.u. $$$ j. $$$ civil no. of has been filed in public interest seeking to highlight failure on part of state of orissa in deploying adequate police force to maintain law and order in kandhamal district of orissa and in protecting innocent people whose human rights were violated after the unfortunate assassination of $$$ and others on.by some maoists. $$$ civil nos. of of and $$$ criminal no. of also highlight the same issues. all these petitions inter alia pray for directions to the concerned authorities to provide proper and adequate facilities in refugee camps to prevent communal violence to provide adequate compensation to the victims of such communal violence to order institution of commission of inquiry by a serving or a retired judge to order investigation into the crimes committed during such violence by central bureau of investigation cbi for short and to set up special courts to deal with and try the offences committed during such violence. these petitions were heard together with writ petition civil no. of as the lead matter. the incident and circumstances that led to the unrest and communal violence were dealt with in the report of the investigating team of the national human rights commission hereinafter referred to as the nhrc certain portions of which for the sake of facility are reproduced hereunder on.at.hrs. when $$$ was in his room some armed men attacked his $$$. of them took control of the unarmed recruits standing outside the ashram at gun point. the rest of them entered the ashram and started indiscriminate firing killing $$$ in the attached toilet of his room where he tried to hide himself. $$$ were killed in the adjoining room. simultaneously some of them went into the room of the personal security officer pso who was not present that day and killed $$$ and local villager $$$ who were lying in that room. the attackers fired about rounds in minutes and ran away from the ashram. in this regard fir no. under section / indian penal code ps -tumdibandh was registered on the statement of the eyewitness brahmachari $$$......................the violence in the present case started after the death of the vishwa hindu parishad leader $$$ allegedly by the christians supported by the naxalites. the violence spread after the procession of the dead body of $$$ was taken through various parts of the district on a grand scale. although the large scale violence started after his death the cracks within the society were already existing as is evident from the data regarding clashes between these communities in $$$$ ref report of $$$ at p- -of annexure -ii. this is also evident from the fact that litigations between both the communities are existing on the issue of reservation for the sc pano christians. writ petition no. of filed on.came up before this court on.. this court thereafter passed various orders from time to time to ensure that the situation was brought under control and relief in full measure was extended to the victims. following were the orders passed by this court a..$$$$issue notice.$$$. $$$. general / counsel for respondents appear and accepts notice.the respondent through its chief secretary is directed to file its response by way of an affidavit by $$$$ as to what steps are being taken to protect the life and property of the affected people in the state and also regarding the proposed yatra on ensuing $$$$.the secretary general is directed to send a copy of this order through telegram / fax to the chief secretary state of orissa immediately.list the matter on.at.p.b..learned senior counsel for the $$$ learned additional solicitor general and learned senior counsel appearing for the state.pursuant to our directions chief secretary of the state of orissa has sworn an affidavit given all the details taken place in the state of orissa to control the violence erupted recently. in the affidavit it is stated that all possible steps have been taken by the government especially in the kandhamal district. it is stated that there are police stations in the district and in all these police stations necessary officers have been deployed and the service of the crpf reserved armed forces raf have also been obtained and deployed. companies of crpf platoons of orissa state armed police osap and in addition to the district s.p. and other officers has taken adequate steps and has given security to those people visiting as well as for protection of others would be provided. it is also stated the state will take all possible steps to maintain law and order in the event of any proposed yatra by any whatsoever. the state government has been dealing with all the situations firmly and even handedly and will continue to do so.learned additional solicitor general submitted that $$$$ the union home minister visited the state of orissa and even in some of the relief camps and satisfied with the service and they are properly operated. but it is submitted that still tension prevails in the state and adequate crpf force has already been deployed to help the state police to maintain the law and order situation and learned senior counsel appearing for the state of orissa requested that in view of the tension more new battalions would be required in the state and learned additional solicitor general submits that urgent steps would be taken to deploy the required force.as regards the proposed yatra to be organized by the section of the people it is submitted all possible steps would be taken to prevent any yatra being held and police and other para military forces to make possible steps to prevent any untoward incident being taken place. section has already been imposed in the state in all the districts where tension prevails.$$$ for the $$$ stated that even $$$$ some of the houses were burnt out in tikabali and $$$ villages. $$$ appearing for the state submitted that so far no such information has been received by them and the matter would be enquired into and urgent steps would be taken in these areas also to prevent any breach of law and order situation.we hope the state police along with crpf and other para military forces would ensure the law and order situation and people 's life and property will be protected to best of their ability. the state government would also take urgent steps to see that those who are in the relief camps are protected and no miscreants shall be allowed to visit the camps to create any problem....c...this court had passed an order and expected that the state government of orissa would take all possible steps to control the violence that had been happening at the state of orissa after the unfortunate killing of $$$ on.. we are told by the counsel for the $$$ that even after the incident it was alleged that about houses had been destroyed and about churches have been partly damaged / burnt and persons have been killed including policemen and some incidents of rape have also occurred. in the additional affidavit the $$$ has alleged that large number of persons are in the relief camps. he further contended that the workers of the non -governmental organizations are not being allowed to meet the persons in the relief camps or to render help to them. the $$$ is also aggrieved by the stand taken by the state in not giving any compensation to the churches which had been destroyed / damaged by the miscreants. as regards victim who had been allegedly raped the petitir wants that the investigation should be handed over to the cbi.heard learned senior counsel appearing for the $$$ the state and learned additional solicitor general for the union of india. the principal secretary home department of the state of orissa has filed a detailed additional affidavit dated.wherein it was stated that enough policemen had been deployed in the area and the learned senior counsel for the state highlighted all the details that were given in the counter affidavit. it is also stated by the learned counsel that apart from these police forces there are also additional police and paramilitary personnel sent by the government of india who were allowed to be in the state be allowed to continue at least till the end of december i. till $$$$ is over.as regards the alleged rape it is stated that accused have so far been arrested by the police and the victim is not cooperating with the police for having the test identification parade...........................as the accused have already been arrested we do not think that at this stage the further investigation should be handed over to the cbi. in the interest of victim and all others we wish that the victim would cooperate with the state police for the further investigation of the case.learned senior counsel appearing for the state submitted that the relief camps are working well and all such details have been stated in the affidavit filed by the home secretary. we make it clear that any member of the ngo can associate in the committee coordinating the relief work in the relief camps. sufficient security also be provided by the state in the relief camps.the state is also agreed to give compensation to the victims. it is stated in the affidavit of the state that rs. is being given for the fully damaged house rs. for partly damaged house and rs. lacs each is being given to the damaged public institutions like schools hospitals etc. and rs. lacs each from the chief minister 's relief fund to each of the families of the persons killed in the violence. the $$$ has prayed that the churches which are being destroyed or partly damaged should also be given their financial assistance. $$$ appearing for the state submitted that the state has taken a policy that religious or worship place of any religion is not being given any financial assistance though several institutions working under these religion are being given. we are told by the counsel for the $$$ that approximately churches have been fully or partly damaged. as regards the damaged churches also the state can have a generous attitude on the matter and assess the damage of those churches or other religious places and render reasonable help to rebuilt the same. we hope that the state could create an atmosphere where there shall be complete harmony between the groups of people and the state shall endeavour to have discussions with the various groups and bring about peace and do all possible help to the victims. the existing battalions / police force sent by the government of india would continue till the end of december.the state has also submitted that fast track courts are established to clear the oases arising out of these incidents...d..court by an order passed on.indicated that sufficient paramilitary forces be deployed in the state of orissa till december. $$$ for the state submits that still these forces are required in the state to maintain the law and order situation even if removal of group of battalion is necessary the same should be done in a phased manner. we make it clear that the state government may have discussions with the home secretary of the home ministry and take an appropriate decision having regard to the law and order situation prevailing in the state for protection of minorities in the state.the learned counsel appearing for the $$$ stated that large number of churches have been demolished and the state government is giving meager amount by way of compensation. some churches and religious places were in existence which are being destroyed and the state government is not giving any compensation on the ground that there is some dispute regarding the land. the government may formulate a scheme regarding these religious places and take appropriate decision....e..learned counsel for the $$$s.it is alleged by the $$$ that large number of houses were either destroyed or partially damaged and in some cases compensation has been given to the owners of these houses. it is also alleged by the $$$s that nearly churches have been partially damaged and compensations have been paid only in respect of churches. the $$$s also states that about persons have died in the various incidents but according to an estimate of the state only persons have died and the compensations have not been given to the dependents of these persons who died. the $$$s also allege that large scale unemployed person are waiting for the work under the nrega scheme and the cards are not provided to them. it is also alleged that so many persons have lost their ration cards and they required fresh ration cards to get the articles under the public supply system. the $$$s have given some details i. name village and other details regarding the individuals.$$$ appearing for the state of orissa seeks time to inquire into the details of these facts given by the $$$s and the learned counsel seeks time to furnish the details regarding the steps already taken by it. it is stated that a committee has also been constituted to give relief to the affected persons. the correctness of these details would be enquired into by the state and a detailed report be furnished to this court within $$$$ weeks. it is also submitted that the state is taking steps to see that all the persons who are in the relief camps exercise their franchise in the ensuing general election and steps are being taken to take them to the polling booths on the date of polling under the protection of the police. $$$. solicitor general of india submits that a sum of rs. lacs each is proposed to be given to the dependents of the persons who have died and as soon as the details are available from the state the amount would be made available to the state.in the meanwhile the relief works which are already in progress may be continued...f..learned senior counsel for the $$$ and also learned counsel for the state.it is pointed out by learned counsel for the petitioners that in some of the cases where the houses have been destroyed and damaged full compensation has not been paid. it is also submitted that all the dependents of the deceased persons have not received compensation.on the other hand learned senior counsel appearing for the state of orissa submitted that it has been assessed that about houses spread over in blocks suffered damage and steps are being taken to pay compensation. it is pointed out that in these blocks i.a.s. officer each has been deputed to look after the rehabilitation measures and it is also stated that in some of the cases installment has been paid and in some cases installment has been paid and in some other cases installment has also been paid. it is pointed out by learned counsel for the petitioners that in the case of families installment has not been paid but it is disputed by learned counsel for the state. the state may pursue the disbursement of compensation to these families.it is submitted by counsel for the state that in the case of deaths which have taken place dependents / legal heirs of the deceased have been paid compensation by the state of upto rs. lacs and rs. lacs has to be paid by the union of india and the list has already been sent by the state but learned additional solicitor general submits that only cases have been recommended by the state and out of them have been paid compensation and the rest of the have been rejected. as regards the rest the state may send its recommendations to the central government and as soon as the same are received by the central government it may take appropriate action and the compensation shall be disbursed at the earliest...... the monitoring by this court through interim orders passed from time to time and the efforts on part of the state government to control and remedy the situation and provide relief to the victims having yielded results according to the petitioner in the lead matter most of the issues and grievances highlighted in the petition now stand addressed. according to the petitioner what remains to be considered are prayers d g and h in writ petition no. of which are set out hereunder d. issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ order or direction directing the state of orissa to forthwith pay compensation to all those families whose houses have been fully damaged @ of rs. lakhs per family and rs. $$$ per family for partial damage and rs. $$$ for every family where death has taken place and rs. lakh for every family where injuries have taken place.g. issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ order or direction directing the respondents to constitute and appoint an independent commission for the framing of the rehabilitation and compensation scheme and to assess the quantum of damage extent of damage methodology of assessment and for proportionate allocation of funds in the affected areas.h. issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ order or direction directing the respondent state to pay all the victims of communal violence full compensation for all the loss incurred at actual market value proportionate to their loss. it may be noted at this stage that during the pendency of these matters an investigating team of nhrc visited the areas in question and submitted its report. the relevant portions of their report are to the following effect:.. it is evident that more forces were sent as and when the violence started spreading to different areas of kandhamal. had the forces arrived in sufficient strength in the initial stage itself the violence and the number of deaths could have been controlled. as far as the contingency plans are concerned it seems that it was not properly formulated in the district. in december the deployment was issued by the district sp in the form of a small wireless signal instead of a detailed order whereas the danger of communal violence was imminent. the district authorities took measures to control the violence after.. additional deployments were made. firs were lodged promptly and arrests were made. a total number of firs were lodged and arrests were made till.. out of the arrests made number of arrests were of persons against whom firs were lodged by name. relief camps were also provided with armed guards and patrolling was being done. despite all the effort the force strength was not to the extent that all the migrants could be provided with security in their own villages. a total of number of companies of the crpf platoons of the osap and sections of apr have been deployed in kandhamal so far............................... there is no evidence regarding the police conniving with the perpetrators of violence and allowing the fundamentalists to attack the christian community. the details of cases registered against the perpetrators of violence and the details of persons arrested is available in pages -of annexure -i................................. the relief camps have been well established by the district authorities. the size of the relief camps are very large this time. thousands of people have taken shelter in each of these camps. relief work however was going on in full swing and basic requirements of food clothing shelter and medicines were being met. the inhabitants of the camps did not complain regarding any shortcoming in the relief operations. all the relief camps are guarded with armed guard. compensation has been provided to those killed in the recent violence at the rate of rs. lacs from cm relief fund. ref. page -annexure -ii. in some cases recommendation of grant of compensation of rs. lacs has been sent to the central govt. ref. page -annexure -ii. the investigation team also observed that efforts were being made by the district authorities to carry out a census of children in these camps and provide them education in the camps itself. doctors were found attending the patients in these camps. there was also a stock of medicines in these camps. the report of the nhrc also included a status report on relief rehabilitation and reconciliation measures taken up by the district administration kandhamal which was submitted to nhrc on.. chapter iii of that status report deals with rehabilitation and reconciliation efforts under following heads:(i assistance to next of kins of dead persons.ii house building assistance(iii financial assistance to religious institutions(iv assistance to damaged shop / shop -cum -residence(v financial assistance to public institutions(vi assistance to the children of victims of communal ethnic or terrorist violence.vii financial assistance to shg centres(viii special steps for rehabilitation of affected families.ix administration of justice(x strengthening of policing infrastructure in district(xi dialogue and peace committees....xii theatre $$$ music...for peace.for the present purposes we may quote items ix and x which were as under:(ix administration of justicegovernment has taken following steps for ensuring justice to the victims of violence state government has constituted a commission of inquiry consisting of shri justice s.c. mohapatra a retired judge to enquire into various matters relating to killing of $$$ and others and incidents of violence in its aftermath.in order to speed up investigation process in aftermath of the communal / ethnic violence a special investigation team was constituted by the state government to investigate the cases related to communal / ethnic violence in the district. because of the efforts of this team investigation have been completed in cases out of total number of cases registered in various police stations with respect to communal / ethnic violence in the district in. the detailed status of cases related to communal / ethnic violence is given in annexure-.c fast track courts have been constituted to ensure speedy disposal of cases related to communal / ethnic violence in the district. government of orissa has also appointed special public prosecutor to deal with such cases in an effective and efficient manner.x strengthening of policing infrastructure in district state government has taken a number of steps for strengthening and streamlining policing in the district. steps taken include:( new police station has been created at chakapad with sanctioned strength of inspector of police sub -inspector of police(0 assistant sub -inspector of police(0 havildar( $$$ and assistant driver(.k. nuagam out -post has been upgraded to a police station with additional sanctioned posts of inspector of $$$ sub -inspector of police(0 assistant sub -inspector of $$$ constable(0 & assistant driver(.as police station areas of g. $$$ raikia tikabali & chakapad were some of the worst affected areas during the communal / ethnic violence in office of the sub -divisional police officer sdpo has been created at g. $$$ for better coordination and immediate response to any such situation in future.post of additional superintendent of police kandhamal has been created for assisting superintendent of police kandhamal in management of law and order.post of reserve inspector general has been created in office of the superintendent of police kandhamal.posts of constables have been upgraded to assistant sub -inspector of police.the state government has sanctioned posts of special police officer spo for the district.) physical infrastructure has been strengthened by way of building men barracks in each of the police station in the district. this allows positioning of crpf osap ossf and other such special police forces within the campus of police station which results in better coordination and immediate response to any law and order situation. the last affidavit on record filed on behalf of the state of orissa on.sets out in detail the steps taken by the state and the present status. paragraphs to of said affidavit are as under:. that it is humbly submitted that during kandhamal riots firs were received and registered and have been duly investigated into. fast track courts have been established to ensure speedy disposal of the cases relating to communal / ethnic violence in the district. special public prosecutors have also been engaged to deal with such cases in an effective and efficient manner. the current status of the cases are given below:. that it is humbly submitted that during kandhamal riots relief camps were set up at tikabali g. $$$ raikia k. nuagaon baliguda daringibari phulbani and phiringia to provide immediate relief to the victims of violence. all efforts were taken for safe return of camp inmates to their villages. as result of which all relief camps are closed now and the last relief camp was closed on.. that it is respectfully submitted that persons had died in group clashes during kandhamal violence. in all these case ex -gratia @ rs.lakhs has been paid to the next -of -kins of such victims out of the chief minister 's relief fund cmrf. similarly central assistance @ rs.lakhs to the next -of -kins of the victims have been disbursed to the noks of deceases persons. not a single case of reported death during kandhamal violence is pending for sanction of -gratia compensation. that it is further respectfully submitted that a total number of houses have been affected which includes partially damaged and fully damaged houses. house building assistance hba @ rs. each for fully damaged house rs. each for partially damaged houses have been provided out of the chief minister 's relief fund. in addition to this financial assistance @ rs. for each fully damaged house and rs. for each partially damaged house have been provided by the government of india. that it is also humbly submitted that religious institutions were damaged during the violence. out of which are big churches and are small churches / prayer houses. financial assistance of rs. lakhs each to number of severely damaged big churches and rs. lakh each to numbers of partly damaged big churches were disbursed. similarly rs. each to numbers of fully damaged small churches / prayer houses rs. each to numbers of severely damaged small churches / prayer houses and rs. each to numbers of partly damages small churches / prayer houses were disbursed. that it is humbly submitted that number of shops / shop -cum -residence were damaged. depending on extent of damage a total amount of rs. was disbursed to shops / shop -cum -residence. similarly rs. out of chief minister 's relief fund and rs. out of prime minister 's relief fund were disbursed to number of public institutions which were damaged during violence. rs. was also given to number of damaged self -help group shg centers. in written submissions filed on.on behalf of the petitioner in the lead matter the facts asserted in the affidavit dated.are not contested but what is stressed is that out of charge -sheets submitted trials have been completed only in which resulted in conviction in cases while cases ended in acquittal and only appeals have been filed. while dealing with cases concerning communal violence that occurred in and around muzaffarnagar in state of uttar pradesh in september this court in its judgment rendered on.in mohd. $$$ and ors. v. union of india and anr. $$$ / sc/06/$$$ / sc/06/ scc had dealt with financial assistance given to the families of the deceased and injured persons the relevant paragraphs being:9. according to letter no. / chh -sa.ni.pr.dated --and government order no. f.a.--police section-1 dated --financial assistance to the families of deceased and injured persons is to be given at the following rates:56. the government of india has also sanctioned gratia relief from the prime minister 's relief fund at the rate of rs. lakhs per family for the dependants or legal heirs of the deceased and at the rate of rs. for the seriously injured persons.......paragraph of the decision discloses that the state granted further compensation of rs. taking the total compensation in cases of death during communal violence to the extent of rs.. it is true that the incidents of communal violence had occurred in and around muzaffarnagar in the year and that the state itself had decided to pay compensation in the scale as mentioned above. we have considered the scales at which compensation has been granted and disbursed in the present matter. in our view the ends of justice would be met if the state government and the central government are directed to pay additional compensations as set out in the chart below. the compensation suggested in writ petition no. of as against each of the categories is set out in column no. while column no. gives the figures of compensation already granted and disbursed. in our view the additional compensation as detailed in column no. ought to be paid to the victims or their family which will provide solace and succor. it is ordered accordingly. the report of the investigating team of the nhrc as stated above does show that though adequate forces were deployed and sent as the violence started spreading the forces could have arrived in sufficient strength at the initial stage itself. if there were incidents of unrest in the past the state ought to have been more vigilant. the nhrc team has found that there was no evidence regarding the police conniving with the perpetrators of violence. further immediate steps were certainly taken in that relief camps were set up and strength of police contingents were increased.paragraphs ix and x of the status report submitted by the district administration to the nhrc on.show the concern of the state government under respective heads. the state government shall do well to enquire into and find the causes for such communal unrest and strengthen the fabric of the society. strengthening of police infrastructure in the district as detailed in paragraph of that status report will undoubtedly help in curbing any re -occurrence of such communal violence but at the same time peace building measures must also be undertaken. in mohd. $$$ supra months after the violence had occurred this court found it difficult to direct that investigation be handed over to any agency other than the state. paragraph of the judgment sums up the discussion on this issue in following words:. at this juncture viz. after $$$$ months whether an agency other than the state is to be directed to investigate and take appropriate steps. we have already noted various circumstances under which the court can entrust investigation to agency other than the state such as sit or cbi. we have to keep in mind as observed by the constitution $$$ referred to supra that no inflexible guidelines can be laid down to decide whether or not such power should be exercised. however this court reiterated that such order is not to be passed as a matter of routine or merely because a party has levelled some allegations against the state police. in other words this extraordinary power must be exercised sparingly cautiously and in exceptional situations where it becomes necessary to provide credibility or instil confidence in investigation or where such an order may be necessary for doing complete justice in enforcing the fundamental rights. apart from this immediately after the occurrence writ petition crl.no. of came to be filed in this court even in the first week of september. pursuant to the same this court after taking note of the importance of the issues viz. many people lost their lives and properties sufferings of both communities and children issued various directions to the state and the central government. we have already extracted those orders in the earlier part of our judgment. in the present case the order dated.discloses that this court did not think that further investigation be handed over to the cbi. at this length of time when final form has been submitted in all cases of communal violence which were registered it would not be proper to direct that the investigation and consequential steps be entrusted to the cbi. we therefore reject such prayer made in the connected petitions. the request for setting up of special courts to deal with and try the offence committed during such violence already stands granted as the state has set up special courts. the affidavit filed on behalf of the state on.discloses that out of registered cases cases resulted in filing of charge -sheets while in cases final reports were submitted. in other words in cases either no offence was found to have been made out or the offenders could not be detected. such large proportion is quite disturbing. the state could do well in looking into all these cases and see that the offenders are brought to book. similarly out of trials which stand completed only have resulted in conviction which again is a matter of concern. the concerned authorities must see to it that the matters are taken up wherever acquittals were not justified on facts. finally we must remind ourselves of the observations of this court in ahmedabad st. xavier 's college society and anr. v. state of gujarat and anr. $$$ / sc/0088/1974$$$ / sc/0088/1974 air sc scc though made in the context of rights of minorities to set up and administer institutions for imparting education are quite apt even in the present context...the minorities are as much children of the soil as the majority and the approach has been to ensure that nothing should be done as might deprive the minorities of a sense of belonging of a feeling of security of a consciousness of equality and of the awareness that the conservation of their religion culture language and script as also the protection of their educational institutions is a fundamental right enshrined in the constitution.. it can indeed be said to be an index of the level of civilization and catholicity of a nation as to how far their minorities feel secure and are not subject to any discrimination or suppression. with the directions as stated above these petitions are disposed of.of w.b. v. committee for protection of democratic rights manu / sc/0121/$$$$manu / sc/0121/$$$$ scc.