s / orders passed by the high courts in writ petitions filed as pildisposition petition dismissedciting reference discussedcase note $$$ of court -violation of directions contained in judgment -$$$ petition -under sections and -$$$ of court act -read with article of constitution of india -alleged violation of directions -contained in judgment and order passed by this court -court passed certain directions -alleged -state government issued forest clearance -$$$ of judgment of this court -whether the alleged contemnors nos. and could be said to have committed any violation of the directions contained in judgment and order passed by this courtfacts this contempt petition under sections and of the contempt of court act read with article of the constitution of india alleges violation of directions contained in judgment and order passed by this court in alaknanda hydro power co. limited v. anuj joshi and ors. persons were arrayed as alleged contemnors in this petition. however during the course of arguments the petitioners gave up their case against alleged contemnor nos. and. this court was also satisfied that no case was made out against them and as such the proceedings against them were dropped. the court therefore confined itself in respect of alleged act of contempt on part of alleged contemnor nos. and.in its judgment and order dated.this court had passed certain directions. it is alleged that petitioner came to know that forest land for vishnugad -pipalkoti project has been transferred to tehri hydro development corporation thdc. the current status of the project as displayed on website of thdc states that g.o. by gouk for transfer of.ha of forest land has been issued vide letter dated $$$$.according to news report dated.work contract for the construction of vishnugad -pipalkoti projects has been awarded recently. these activities can be undertaken only after government of uttarakhand issues forest clearance. the petitioner has sent right to information request for copies of forest clearance regarding vishnugad -pipalkoti and $$$ to $$$. and on.which remain unreplied on the date of filing this petition. though stage and stage forest clearances were issued to the vishnugad -pipalkoti project before.however state government appears to have issued forest clearance after.which is in contempt of the judgment of this hon'ble court. $$$ while dismissing the petition1.the court perused the record and heard shri bharat jhunjhuwala applicant no. in support of the petition and mr. $$$ and mr. $$$ learned counsel for the respondents. the letter dated.from additional secretary uttarakhand has simply communicated the conditions stipulated in the approval dated.. the approval was well before the judgment and order dated.. plainly the letter dated.has not taken any decision after.but has merely communicated the decision taken well before.. there is thus no violation of any of the directions contained in para of the judgment and order dated.. further the alleged contemnor no. has simply received the communication dated.while copy of that communication was marked to general manager tehri hydro development corporation ltd. in court 's view the alleged contemnors nos. and could not be said to have committed any violation of the directions contained in judgment and order dated..the court therefore dismissed the contempt petition.